

BOOK IV.

How Pandaros wounded Menelaos by treachery; and Agamemnon exhorted his
chief captains to battle.


Now the gods sat by Zeus and held assembly on the golden floor, and in
the midst the lady Hebe poured them their nectar: they with golden
goblets pledged one another, and gazed upon the city of the Trojans.
Then did Kronos’ son essay to provoke Hera with vexing words, and spake
maliciously: “Twain goddesses hath Menelaos for his helpers, even Hera
of Argos and Alalkomenean Athene. Yet these sit apart and take there
pleasure in beholding; but beside that other ever standeth
laughter-loving Aphrodite and wardeth off fate from him, and now hath
she saved him as he thought to perish. But of a truth the victory is to
Menelaos dear to Ares; so let us take thought how these things shall
be; whether once more we shall arouse ill war and the dread battle-din,
or put friendship between the foes. Moreover if this were welcome to
all and well pleasing, may the city of king Priam yet be an habitation,
and Menelaos take back Helen of Argos.”

So said he, but Athene and Hera murmured thereat, who were sitting by
him and devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace and
said not anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold
upon her: But Hera’s breast contained not her anger, and she spake:
“Most dread son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? How hast
thou the will to make my labour void and of none effect, and the sweat
of my toil that I sweated, when my horses were wearied with my
summoning of the host, to be the plague of Priam and his sons? Do as
thou wilt; but we other gods do not all approve thee.”

Then in sore anger Zeus the cloud-gatherer spake to her: “Good lack,
how have Priam and Priam’s sons done thee such great wrong that thou
art furiously minded to sack the established citadel of Ilios?
Perchance wert thou to enter within the gates and long walls and devour
Priam raw, and Priam’s sons and all the Trojans, then mightest thou
assuage thine anger. Do as thou art minded, only let not this quarrel
hereafter be to me and thee a sore strife between us both. And this
moreover will I say to thee, and do thou lay it to they heart; whene’er
I too be of eager mind to lay waste to a city where is the race of men
that are dear to thee, hinder thou not my wrath, but let me be, even as
I yield to thee of free will, yet with soul unwilling. For all cities
beneath sun and starry heaven that are the dwelling of mortal men, holy
Ilios was most honoured of my heart, and Priam and the folk of Priam of
the good ashen spear. For never did mine altar lack the seemly feast,
even drink-offering and burnt-offering, the worship that is our due.”

Then Helen the ox-eyed queen made answer to him: “Of a surety three
cities are there that are dearest far to me, Argos and Sparta and
wide-wayed Mykene; these lay thou waste whene’er they are found hateful
to thy heart; not for them will I stand forth, nor do I grudge thee
them. For even if I be jealous and would forbid thee to overthrow them,
yet will my jealousy not avail, seeing that thou art stronger far than
I. Still must my labour too not be made of none effect; for I also am a
god, and my lineage is even as thine, and Kronos the crooked counsellor
begat me to the place of honour in double wise, by birthright, and
because I am named thy spouse, and thou art king among all the
immortals. Let us indeed yield each to other herein, I to thee and thou
to me, and the rest of the immortal gods will follow with us; and do
thou with speed charge Athene to betake her to the fierce battle din of
Trojans and Achaians, and to essay that the Trojans may first take upon
them to do violence to the Achaians in their triumph, despite the
oaths.”

So said she, and the father of men and gods disregarded not; forthwith
he spake to Athene winged words: “Betake thee with all speed to the
host, to the midst of Trojans and Achaians, and essay that the Trojans
may first take upon them to do violence to the Achaians in their
triumph, despite the oaths.”

So spake he, and roused Athene that already was set thereon; and from
Olympus’ heights she darted down. Even as the son of Kronos the crooked
counsellor sendeth a star, a portent for mariners or a wide host of
men, bright shining, and therefrom are scattered sparks in multitude;
even in such guise sped Pallas Athene to earth, and leapt into their
midst; and astonishment came on them that beheld, on horse-taming
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. And thus would many an one say,
looking at his neighbor: “Of a surety either shall sore war and the
fierce battle din return again; or else Zeus doth stablish peace
between the foes, even he that is mel’s dispenser of battle.”

Thus would many an one of Achaians and Trojans say. Then the goddess
entered the throng of Trojans in the likeness of a man, even Antenor’s
son Laodokos, a stalwart warrior, and sought for godlike Pandaros, if
haply she might find him. Lykaol’s son found she, the noble and
stalwart, standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from the streams of Aisepos. So
she came near and spake winged words: “Wilt thou now hearken to me,
thou wise son of Lykaon? Then wouldst thou take heart to shoot a swift
arrow at Menelaos, and wouldst win favour and glory before all the
Trojans, and before king Alexandros most of all. Surely from him first
of any wouldst thou receive glorious gifts, if perchance he see
Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, vanquished by thy dart and brought to
the grievous pyre. Go to now, shoot at glorious Menelaos, and vow to
Apollo, the son of light [Or, perhaps, “the Wolf-born”], the lord of
archery, to sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when thou
art returned to thy home, in the city of holy Zeleia.”

So spake Athene, and persuaded his fool’s heart. Forthwith he
unsheathed his polished bow of horn of a wild ibex that he himself had
erst smitten beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, the while
he awaited in a lurking-place; and had pierced it in the chest, so that
it fell backward on the rock. Now from its head sprang there horns of
sixteen palms; these the artificer, even the worker in horn, joined
cunningly together, and polished them all well and set the top of gold
thereon. So he laid it down when he had well strung it, by resting it
upon the ground; and his staunch comrades held their shields before
him, lest the warrior sons of the Achaians should first set on them,
ere Menelaos, Atreus’ son, were smitten. Then opened he the lid of his
quiver and took forth a feathered arrow, never yet shot, a source of
grievous pangs; and anon he laid the bitter dart upon the string and
vowed to Apollo, the son of light, the lord of archery, to sacrifice a
goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when he should have returned to his
home in the city of holy Zeleia. Then he took the notch and string of
oxes’ sinew together, and drew, bringing to his breast the string, and
to the bow the iron head. So when he had now bent the great bow into a
round, the horn twanged, and the string sang aloud, and the keen arrow
leapt eager to wing his way amid the throng.

But the blessed gods immortal forgat not thee, Menelaos; and before all
the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil, who stood before thee
and warded off the piercing dart. She turned it just aside from the
flesh, even as a mother driveth a fly from her child that lieth in
sweet slumber; and with her own hand guided it where the golden buckles
of the belt were clasped and the doubled breastplate met them. So the
bitter arrow lighted upon the firm belt; through the inwrought belt it
sped and through the curiously wrought breastplate it pressed on and
through the taslet [and apron or belt set with metal, worn below the
corslet] he wore to shield his flesh, a barrier against darts; and this
best shielded him, yet it passed on even through this. Then did the
arrow graze the warrior’s outermost flesh, and forthwith the dusky
blood flowed from the wound.

As when some woman of Maionia or Karia staineth ivory with purple, to
make a cheek-piece for horses, and it is laid up in the treasure
chamber, and many a horseman prayeth for it to wear; but it is laid up
to be a king’s boast, alike an adornment for his horse and a glory for
his charioteer; even in such wise, Menelaos, were thy shapely thighs
stained with blood and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.

Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men when he saw the black blood
flowing from the wound. And Menelaos dear to Ares likewise shuddered;
but when he saw how thread [by which the iron head was attached to the
shaft] and bards were without, his spirit was gathered in his breast
again. Then lord Agamemnon moaned deep, and spake among them, holding
Menelaos by the hand; and his comrades made moan the while: “Dear
brother, to thy death, meseemeth, pledged I these oaths, setting thee
forth to fight the Trojans alone before the face of the Achaians;
seeing that the Trojans have so smitten thee, and trodden under floor
the trusty oaths. Yet in no wise is an oath of none effect, and the
blood of lambs and pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For even if the Olympian bring not about
the fulfilment forthwith, yet doth he fulfil at last, and men make dear
amends, even with their own heads and their wives and little ones. Yea
of a surety I know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy
Ilios to be laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear; and Zeus the son of Kronos enthroned on high, that dwelleth in
the heaven, himself shall brandish over them all his lowring aegis, in
indignation at this deceit. Then shall all this not be void; yet shall
I have sore sorrow for thee, Menelaos, if thou die and fulfil the lot
of life. Yea in utter shame should I return to thirsty Argos, seeing
that the Achaians will forthwith bethink them of their native land, and
so should we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos. And the earth shall rot thy bones as thou liest in Troy with thy
task unfinished: and thus shall many an overweening Trojan say as he
leapeth upon the tomb of glorious Menelaos: ‘Would to God Agamemnon
might so fulfil his wrath in every matter, even as now he led hither
the host of the Achaians for naught, and hath gone home again to his
dear native land with empty ships, and hath left noble Menelaos
behind.’ Thus shall men say hereafter: in that day let the wide earth
gape for me.”

But golden-haired Menelaos encouraged him and said: “Be of good
courage, neither dismay at all the host of the Achaians. The keen dart
lighted not upon a deadly spot; my glistening belt in front stayed it,
and the kirtle of mail beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths
fashioned.”

Then lord Agamemnon answered him and said: “Would it may be so, dear
Menelaos. But the leech shall feel the wound, and lay thereon drugs
that shall assuage thy dire pangs.”

So saying he spake to godlike Talthybios, his herald: “Talthybios, with
all speed call Machaon hither, the hero son of Asklepios the noble
leech, to see Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, whom one well skilled in
archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath wounded with a bow-shot, to his
glory and our grief.”

So said he, and the herald heard him and disregarded not, and went his
way through the host of mail-clad Achaians to spy out the hero Machaon.
Him he found standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from Trike, pasture land of
horses. So he came near and spake his winged words: “Arise, thou son of
Asklepios. Lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see Menelaos, captain of the
Achaians, whom one well skilled in archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath
wounded with a bow-shot, to his glory and our grief.”

So saying he aroused his spirit in his breast, and they went their way
amid the throng, through the wide host of the Achaians. And when they
were now come where was golden-haired Menelaos wounded, and all as many
as were chieftains gathered around him in a circle, the godlike hero
came and stood in their midst, and anon drew forth the arrow from the
clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the keen barbs were broken
backwards. Then he loosed the glistering belt and kirtle of mail
beneath and taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned; and when he saw the
wound where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood and
cunningly spread thereon soothing drugs, such as Cheiron of his good
will had imparted to his sire.

While these were tending Menelaos of the loud war-cry, the ranks of
shield-bearing Trojans came on; so the Achaians donned their arms
again, and bethought them of the fray. Now wouldest thou not see noble
Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, unready to fight, but very eager
for glorious battle. He left his horses and his chariot adorned with
bronze; and his squire, even Eurymedon son of Ptolemaios Peiraieus’
son, kept apart the snorting steeds; and he straitly charged him to
have them at hand whenever weariness should come upon his limbs with
marshalling so many; and thus on foot ranged he through the ranks of
warriors. And whomsoever of all the fleet-horsed Danaans he found
eager, he stood by them and by his words encouraged them: “Ye Argives,
relax not in any wise your impetuous valour; for father Zeus will be no
helper of liars, but as these were first to transgress against the
oaths, so shall their own tender flesh be eaten of the vultures, and we
shall bear away their dear wives and little children in our ships, when
once we take the stronghold.”

But whomsoever he found shrinking from hateful battle, these he chode
sore with angry words: “Ye Argives, warriors of the bow, ye men of
dishonour, have ye no shame? Why stand ye thus dazed like fawns that
are weary with running over the long plain and so stand still, and no
valour is found in their hearts at all? Even thus stand ye dazed, and
fight not. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your
good ships’ sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, to see if
Kronion will stretch his arm over you indeed?”

So masterfully ranged he through the ranks of warriors. Then came he to
the Cretans as he went through the throng of warriors; and these were
taking arms around wise Idomeneus; Idomeneus amid the foremost, valiant
as a wild boar, and Meriones the while was hastening his hindermost
battalions. Then Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to see them, and anon
spake to Idomeneus with kindly words: “Idomeneus, more than all the
fleet-horsed Danaans do I honour thee, whether in war or in task of
other sort or in the feast, when the chieftains of the Argives mingle
in the bowl the gleaming wine of the counsellor. For even though all
the other flowing-haired Achaians drink one allotted portion, yet thy
cup standeth ever full even as mine, to drink as oft as they soul
biddeth thee. Now arouse thee to war like such an one as thou avowest
thyself to be of old.”

And Idomeneus the captain of the Cretans made answer to him: “Atreides,
of very truth will I be to thee a trusty comrade even as at the first I
promised and gave my pledge; but do thou urge on all the flowing-haired
Achaians, that we may fight will all speed, seeing the Trojans have
disannulled the oaths. But for all that death and sorrow hereafter
shall be their lot, because they were the first to transgress against
the oaths.”

So said he, and Agamemnon passed on glad at heart. Then came he to the
Aiantes as he went through the throng of warriors; and these twain were
arming, and a cloud of footmen followed with them. Even as when a
goatherd from a place of outlook seeth a cloud coming across the deep
before the blast of the west wind; and to him being afar it seemeth
ever blacker, even as pitch, as it goeth along the deep, and bringeth a
great whirlwind, and he shuddereth to see it and driveth his flock
beneath a cave; even in such wise moved the serried battalions of young
men, the fosterlings of Zeus, by the side of the Aiantes into furious
war, battalions dark of line, bristling with shields and spears. And
lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see them and spake to them winged words, and
said: “Aiantes, leaders of the mail-clad Argives, to you twain, seeing
it is not seemly to urge you, give I no charge; for of your own selves
ye do indeed bid your folk to fight amain. Ah, father Zeus and Athene
and Apollo, would that all had like spirit in their breasts; then would
king Priam’s city soon bow captive and wasted beneath our hands.”

So saying he left them there, and went to others. Then found he Nestor,
the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, arraying his comrades, and
urging them to fight, around great Pelegon and Alastor and Chromios and
lord Haimon and Bias shepherd of the host. And first he arrayed the
horsemen with horses and chariots, and behind them the footmen many and
brave, to be a bulwark of battle; but the cowards he drave into the
midst, that every man, even though he would not, yet of necessity must
fight. First he laid charge upon the horsemen; these he bade hold in
their horses nor be entangled in the throng. “Neither let any man,
trusting in his horsemanship and manhood, be eager to fight the Trojans
alone and before the rest, nor yet let him draw back, for so will ye be
enfeebled. But whomsoever a warrior from the place of his own car can
come at a chariot of the foe, let him thrust forth with his spear; even
so is the far better way. Thus moreover did men of old time lay low
cities and walls, because they had this mind and spirit in their
breasts.”

So did the old man charge them, being well skilled of yore in battles.
And lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see hem, and spake to him winged words,
and said: “Old man, would to god that, even as thy spirit is in thine
own breast, thy limbs might obey and thy strength be unabated. But the
common lot of age is heavy upon thee; would that it had come upon some
other man, and thou wert amid the young.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Atreides, I verily, even
I too, would wish to be as on the day when I slew noble Ereuthalion.
But the gods in no wise grant men all things at once. As I was then a
youth, so doth old age now beset me. Yet even so will I abide among the
horsemen and urge them by counsel and words; for that is the right of
elders. But the young men shall wield the spear, they that are more
youthful than I and have confidence in their strength.”

So spake he, and Atreides passed on glad at heart. He found Menestheus
the charioteer, the son of Peteos, standing still, and round him were
the Athenians, masters of the battle-cry. And hard by stood crafty
Odysseus, and round about him the ranks of Kephallenians, no feeble
folk, stood still; for their host had not yet heard the battle-cry,
seeing the battalions of horse-taming Trojans and Achaians had but just
bestirred them to move; so these stood still tarrying till some other
column of the Achaians should advance to set upon the Trojans and begin
the battle. But when Agamemnon king of men saw it, he upbraided them,
and spake to them winged words, saying: “O son of king Peteos
fosterling of Zeus, and thou skilled in evil wiles, thou cunning of
mind, why stand ye shrinking apart, and tarry for others? You beseemeth
it to stand in your place amid the foremost and to front the fiery
battle; for ye are the first to hear my bidding to the feast, as oft as
we Achaians prepare a feast for the counsellors. Then are ye glad to
eat roast meat and drink your cups of honey-sweet wine as long as ye
will. But now would ye gladly behold it, yea, if ten columns of
Achaians in front of you were fighting with the pitiless sword.”

But Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely at him and said:
“Atreides, what word is this that hath escaped the barrier of thy lips?
How sayest thou that we are slack in battle? When once our [Or, “that
we are slack in battle, when once we Achaians,” putting the note of
interrogation after “tamers of horses.”] Achaians launch furious war on
the Trojans, tamers of horses, then shalt thou, if thou wilt, and if
thou hast any care therefor, behold Telemachos’ dear father mingling
with the champions of the Trojans, the tamers of horses. But that thou
sayest is empty as air.”

Then lord Agamemnon spake to him smiling, seeing how he was wroth, and
took back his saying: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus full of
devices, neither do I chide thee beyond measure nor urge thee; for I
know that thy heart within thy breast is kindly disposed; for thy
thoughts are as my thoughts. Go to, we will make amends hereafter, if
any ill word hath been spoken now; may the gods bring it all to none
effect.”

So saying he left them there and went on to others. The son of Tydeus
found he, high-hearted Diomedes, standing still with horses and chariot
well compact; and by him stood Sthenelos son of Kapaneus. Him lord
Agamemnon saw and upbraided, and spake to him winged words, and said:
“Ah me, thou son of wise Tydeus tamer of horses, why shrinkest thou,
why gazest thou at the highways of the battle? Not thus was Tydeus wont
to shrink, but rather to fight his enemies far in front of his dear
comrades, as they say that beheld him at the task; for never did I meet
him nor behold him, but men say that he was preeminent amid all. Of a
truth he came to Mykene, not in enmity, but as a guest with godlike
Polyneikes, to raise him an army for the war that they were levying
against the holy walls of Thebes; and they besought earnestly that
valiant allies might be given them, and our folk were fain to grant
them and made assent to their entreaty, only Zeus showed omens of ill
and turned their minds. So when these were departed and were come on
their way, and had attained to Asopos deep in rushes, that maketh his
bed in grass, there did the Achaians appoint Tydeus to be their
ambassador. So he went and found the multitude of the sons of Kadmos
feasting in the palace of mighty Eteokles. Yet was knightly Tydeus,
even though a stranger, not afraid, being alone amid the multitude of
the Kadmeians, but challenged them all to feats of strength, and in
every one vanquished he them easily; so present a helper was Athene
unto him. But the Kadmeians, the urgers of horses, were wroth, and as
he fared back again they brought and set a strong ambush, even fifty
young men, whose leaders were twain, Maion son of Haimon, like to the
immortals, and Autophonos’ son Polyphontes staunch in battle. Still
even on the Tydeus brought shameful death; he slew them all, save one
that he sent home alone; Maion to wit he sent away in obedience to the
omens of heaven. Such was Tydeus of Aitolia; but he begat a son that in
battle is worse than he; only in harangue is he the better.”

So said he, and stalwart Diomedes made no answer, but had respect to
the chiding of the king revered. But the son of glorious Kapaneus
answered him: “Atreides, utter not falsehood, seeing thou knowest how
to speak truly. We avow ourselves to be better men by far than our
fathers were: we did take the seat of Thebes the seven gated, though we
led a scantier host against a stronger wall, because we followed the
omens of the gods and the salvation of Zeus; but they perished by their
own iniquities. Do not thou therefore in any wise have our fathers in
like honour with us.”

But stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him, and said: “Brother, sit
silent and obey my saying. I grudge not that Agamemnon shepherd of the
host should urge on the well-greaved Achaians to fight; for him the
glory will attend if the Achaians lay the Trojans low and take holy
Ilios; and his will be the great sorrow if the Achaians be laid low. Go
to now, let us too bethink us of impetuous valour.”

He spake and leapt in his armour from the chariot to earth, and
terribly rang the bronze upon the chieftail’s breast as he moved;
thereat might fear have come even upon one stout-hearted.

As when on the echoing beach the sea-wave lifteth up itself in close
array before the driving of the west wind; out on the deep doth it
first raise its head, and then breaketh upon the land and belloweth
aloud and goeth with arching crest about the promontories, and speweth
the foaming brine afar; even so in close array moved the battalions of
the Danaans without pause to battle. Each captain gave his men the
word, and the rest went silently; thou wouldest not deem that all the
great host following them had any voice within their breasts; in
silence feared they their captains. On every man glittered the
inwrought armour wherewith they went clad. But for the Trojans, like
sheep beyond number that stand in the courtyard of a man of great
substance, to be milked of their white milk, and bleat without ceasing
to hear their lambs’ cry, even so arose the clamour of the Trojans
through the wide host. For they had not all like speech nor one
language, but their tongues were mingled, and they were brought from
many lands. These were urged on of Ares, and those of bright-eyed
Athene, and Terror and Rout, and Strife whose fury wearieth not, sister
and friend of murderous Ares; her crest is but lowly at the first, but
afterward she holdeth up her head in heaven and her feet walk upon the
earth. She now cast common discord in their midst, as she fared through
the throng and made the lamentation of men to wax.

Now when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed
shields pressed each on each and mighty din arose. Then were heard the
voice of groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and
the slain, and the earth streamed with blood. As when two winter
torrents flow down the mountains to a watersmeet and join their furious
flood within the ravine from their great springs, and the shepherd
heareth the roaring far off among the hills: even so from the joining
of battle came there forth shouting and travail. Antilochos first slew
a Trojan warrior in full array, valiant amid the champions, Echepolos
son of Thalysios; him was he first to smite upon the ridge of his
crested helmet, and he drave the spear into his brow and the point of
bronze passed within the bone; darkness clouded his eyes, and he
crashed like a tower amid the press of fight. As he fell lord Elephenor
caught him by the foot, Chalkodol’s son, captain of the great-hearted
Abantes, and dragged him from beneath the darts, eager with all speed
to despoil him of his armour. Yet but for a little endured his essay;
great-hearted Agenor saw him haling away the corpse, and where his side
was left uncovered of his buckler as he bowed him down, there smote he
him with bronze-tipped spear-shaft and unstrung his limbs. So his life
departed from him, and over his corpse the task of Trojans and Achaians
grew hot; like wolves leapt they one at another, and man lashed at man.

Next Telamonian Aias smote Anthemiol’s son, the lusty stripling
Simoeisios, whose erst is mother bare beside the banks of Simoeis on
the way down from Ida whither she had followed with her parents to see
their flocks. Therefore they called him Simoeisios, but he repaid not
his dear parents the recompense of his nurture; scanty was his span of
life by reason of the spear of great-hearted Aias that laid him low.
For as he went he first was smitten on his right breast beside the pap;
straight though his shoulder passed the spear of bronze, and he fell to
the ground in the dust like a poplar-tree, that hath grown up smooth in
the lowland of a great marsh, and its branches grow upon the top
thereof; this hath a wainwright felled with gleaming steel, to bend him
a felloe for a goodly chariot, and so it lies drying by a river’s
banks. In such a fashion did heaven-sprung Aias slay Simoeisios son of
Anthemion; then at him Antiphos of the glancing corslet, Priam’s son,
made a cast with his keen javelin across the throng. Him he missed, but
smote Odysseus’ valiant comrade Leukos in the groin as he drew the
corpse his way, so that he fell upon it and the body dropped from his
hands. Then Odysseus was very wroth at heart for the slaying of him,
and strode through the forefront of the battle harnessed in flashing
bronze, and went and stood hard by and glanced around him, and cast his
bright javelin; and the Trojans shrank before the casting of the hero.
He sped not the dart in vain, but smote Demokoon, Priam’s bastard son
that had come to him from tending his fleet mares in Abydos. Him
Odysseus, being wroth for his comrade’s sake, smote with his javelin on
one temple; and through both temples passed the point of bronze, and
darkness clouded his eyes, and he fell with a crash and his armour
clanged upon him. Then the forefighters and glorious Hector yielded,
and the Argives shouted aloud, and drew the bodies unto them, and
pressed yet further onward. But Apollo looked down from Pergamos, and
had indignation, and with a shout called to the Trojans: “Arise, ye
Trojans, tamers of horses; yield not to the Argives in fight; not of
stone nor iron is their flesh, that it should resist the piercing
bronze when they are smitten. Moreover Achilles, son of Thetis of the
fair tresses, fighteth not, but amid the ships broodeth on his bitter
anger.”

So spake the dread god from the city; and the Achaians likewise were
urged on of Zeus’ daughter the Triton-born, most glorious, as she
passed through the throng wheresoever she beheld them slackening.

Next was Diores son of Amrynkeus caught in the snare of fate; for he
was smitten by a jagged stone on the right leg hard by the ankle, and
the caster thereof was captain of the men of Thrace, Peirros son of
Imbrasos that had come from Ainos. The pitiless stone crushed utterly
the two sinews and the bones; back fell he in the dust, and stretched
out both his hands to his dear comrades, gasping out his soul. Then he
that smote him, even Peiroos, sprang at him and pierced him with a
spear beside the navel; so all his bowels gushed forth upon the ground,
and darkness clouded his eyes. But even as Peiroos departed from him
Thoas of Aitolia smote with a spear his chest above the pap, and the
point fixed in his lung. Then Thoas came close, and plucked out from
his breast the ponderous spear, and drew his sharp sword, wherewith he
smote his belly in the midst, and took his life. Yet he stripped not
off his armour; for his comrades, the men of Thrace that wear the
top-knot, stood around, their long spears in their hands, and albeit he
was great and valiant and proud they drave him off from them and he
gave ground reeling. So were the two captains stretched in the dust
side by side, he of the Thracians and he of the mail-clad Epeians; and
around them were many others likewise slain.

Now would none any more enter in and make light of the battle, could it
be that a man yet unwounded by dart or thrust of keen bronze might roam
in the midst, being led of Pallas Athene by the hand, and by her
guarded from the flying shafts. For many Trojans that day and many
Achaians were laid side by side upon their faces in the dust.
