


BOOK XII.

How the Trojans and allies broke within the wall of the Achaians.


So in the huts the strong son of Menortios was tending the wounded
Eurypylos, but still they fought confusedly, the Argives and Trojans.
Nor were the fosse of the Danaans and their wide wall above long to
protect them, the wall they had builded for defence of the ships, and
the fosse they had drawn round about; for neither had they given goodly
hecatombs to the gods, that it might guard with its bounds their swift
ships and rich spoil. Nay, maugre the deathless gods was it builded,
wherefore it abode steadfast for no long time. While Hector yet lived,
and yet Achilles kept his wrath, and unsacked was the city of Priam the
king, so long the great wall of the Achaians likewise abode steadfast.
But when all the bravest of the Trojans died, and many of the
Argives,—some were taken, and some were left,—and the city of Priam was
sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their ships
to their own dear country, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo take
counsel to wash away the wall, bringing in the might of the rivers, of
all that flow from the hills of Ida to the sea. Rhesos there was, and
Heptaporos, and Karesos, and Rhodios, Grenikos, and Aisepos, and goodly
Skamandros, and Simoeis, whereby many shields and helms fell in the
dust, and the generation of men half divine; the mouths of all these
waters did Phoebus Apollo turn together, and for nine days he drave
their stream against the wall; and still Zeus rained unceasingly, that
the quicker he might mingle the wall with the salt sea. And the Shaker
of the earth, with his trident in his hands, was himself the leader,
and sent forth into the waves all the foundations of beams and stones
that the Achaians had laid with toil, and made all smooth by the strong
current of the Hellespont, and covered again the great beach with sand,
when he had swept away the wall, and turned the rivers back to flow in
their channel, where of old they poured down their fair flow of water.

So were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and
the din of war sounded about the well-builded wall, and the beams of
the towers rang beneath the strokes; while the Argives, subdued by the
scourge of Zeus, were penned and driven in by the hollow ships, in
dread of Hector, the mighty maker of flight, but he, as aforetime,
fought like a whirlwind. And as when, among hounds and hunting men, a
boar or lion wheeleth him about, raging in his strength, and these
array themselves in fashion like a tower, and stand up against him,
casting many javelins from their hands; but never is his stout heart
confused nor afraid, and his courage is his bane, and often he wheeleth
him about, and maketh trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he
maketh onset there the ranks of men give way, even so Hector went and
besought his comrades through the press, and spurred them on to cross
the dyke. But his swift-footed horses dared not, but loud they neighed,
standing by the sheer edge, for the wide fosse affrighted them, neither
easy to leap from hard by, nor to cross, for overhanging banks stood
round about it all on either hand, and above it was furnished with
sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaians had planted there, thick set
and great, a bulwark against hostile men. Thereby not lightly might a
horse enter, drawing a well-wheeled chariot; but the footmen were
eager, if they might accomplish it. Then Polydamas drew near valiant
Hector, and spake to him: “Hector and ye other leaders of the Trojans
and allies, foolishly do we drive our fleet horses through the dyke;
nay right hard it is to cross, for sharp stakes stand in it, and over
against them the wall of the Achaians. Thereby none may go down and
fight in chariots, for strait is the place wherein, methinks, we might
come by a mischief. For if Zeus that thunders on high is utterly to
destroy them in his evil will, and is minded to help the Trojans,
verily then I too would desire that even instantly this might be, that
the Achaians should perish here nameless far from Argos: but and if
they turn again, and we flee back from among the ships, and rush into
the delved ditch, then methinks that not even one from among us to bear
the tidings will win back to the city before the force of the Achaians
when they rally. But come as I declare, let us all obey. Let our
squires hold the horses by the dyke, while we being harnessed in our
gear as foot soldiers follow all together with Hector, and the Achaians
will not withstand us, if indeed the bands of death be made fast upon
them.”

So spake Polydamas, and his wise word pleased Hector well, and
straightway in his harness he leaped from his chariot to the ground.
Nor were the other Trojans gathered upon the chariots, but they all
leaped forth, when they beheld goodly Hector. There each gave it into
the charge of his own charioteer, to keep the horses orderly there by
the fosse. And they divided, and arrayed themselves, and ordered in
five companies they followed with the leaders.

Now they that went with Hector and noble Polydamas, these were most,
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall, and fight by the
hollow ships; and with them followed Kebriones for the third, for
Hector had left another man with his chariot, a weaker warrior than
Kebriones. The second company Paris led, and Alkathoos, and Agenor: and
the third company Helenos led, and godlike Deiphobos,—two sons of
Priam,—the third was the warrior Asios, Asios Hyrtakos’ son, whom his
tall sorrel steeds brought out of Arisbe, from the river Selleeis. And
of the fourth company was the brave son of Anchises leader, even
Aineias; and with him were two sons of Antenor, Archelochos and Akamas,
both well skilled in all warfare.

And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and to be with him he chose
Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios, for they seamed to him to be
manifestly the bravest of all after himself but he was excellent, yea,
above all the host. And these when they had arrayed one another with
well-fashioned shields of bulls’ hide, went straight and eager against
the Danaans, nor deemed that they could longer resist them, but that
themselves should fall on the black ships.

Then the rest of the Trojans and the far-famed allies obeyed the
counsel of blameless Polydamas, but Asios, son of Hyrtakos, leader of
men, willed not to leave his horses there, and his squire the
charioteer, but with them he drew near the swift ships, fond man! for
never was he, avoiding evil Fates, to return, rejoicing in his horses
and chariot, back from the ships to windy Ilios. Nay, ere that the Fate
of ill name over-shadowed him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the haughty
son of Deukalion. For Asios went against the left flank of the ships,
whereby the Achaians returned out of the plain with chariots and
horses: there he drave through his horses and his car, nor found he the
doors shut on the gates, and the long bar, but men were holding them
open if perchance they might save any of their comrades fleeing out of
the battle towards the ships. Straight thereby held he his horses with
unswerving aim, and his men followed him, crying shrilly, for they
deemed that the Achaians could no longer hold them off, but that
themselves would fall on the black ships: fools, for in the gates they
found two men of the bravest, the high-hearted sons of the warrior
Lapithae, one the son of Peirithoos, strong Polypoites, and one
Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane of men. These twain stood in front of
the lofty gates, like high-crested oak trees in the hills, that for
ever abide the wind and rain, firm fixed with roots great and long;
even so these twain, trusting to the mightiness of their hands, abode
the coming of great Asios, and fled not. But straight came the Trojans
against the well-builded wall, holding their shields of dry bulls’ hide
on high, with mighty clamour, round the prince Asios, and Iamenos, and
Orestes, and Adamas, son of Asios, and Thoon, and Oinomaos. But the
other twain for a while, being within the wall, urged the well-greaved
Achaians to fight for the ships; but when they saw the Trojans
assailing the wall, while the Danaans cried and turned in flight, then
forth rushed the twain, and fought in front of the gates like wild
boars that in the mountains abide the assailing crew of men and dogs,
and charging on either flank they crush the wood around them, cutting
it at the root, and the clatter of their tusks wages loud, till one
smite them and take their life away: so clattered the bright bronze on
the breasts of the twain, as they were smitten in close fight, for
right hardily they fought, trusting to the host above them, and to
their own strength.

For the men above were casting with stones from the well-builded
towers, in defence of themselves and of the huts, and of the
swift-faring ships. And like snowflakes the stones fell earthward,
flakes that a tempestuous wind, as it driveth the dark clouds, rains
thickly down on the bounteous earth: so thick fell the missiles from
the hands of Achaians and Trojans alike, and their helms rang harsh and
their bossy shields, being smitten with mighty stones. Verily then
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, groaned and smote both his thighs, and
indignantly he spake: “Zeus, verily thou too dost greatly love a lie,
for I deemed not that the Achaian heroes could withstand our might and
our hands invincible. But they like wasps of nimble body, or bees that
have made their dwellings in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow
hold, but abide and keep the hunters at bay for the sake of their
little ones, even so these men have no will to give ground from the
gates, though they are but two, ere they slay or be slain.”

So spake he, nor with his speech did he persuade the mind of Zeus, for
his will was to give renown to Hector.

But the others were fighting about the other gates, and hard it were
for me like a god to tell all these things, for everywhere around the
wall of stone rose the fire divine; the Argives, for all their sorrow,
defending the ships of necessity; and all the gods were grieved at
heart, as many as were defenders of the Danaans in battle. And together
the Lapithae waged war and strife.

There the son of Peirithoos, mighty Polypoites, smote Damasos with the
spear, through the helmet with cheekpieces of bronze; nor did the
bronze helm stay the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through
the bone, and all the brain within was scattered, and the spear
overcame him in his eagerness. Thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenos.
And Leonteus of the stock of Ares smote Hippomachos, son of Antimachos,
with the spear, striking him on the girdle. Then again he drew his
sharp sword from the sheath, and smote Antiphates first in close fight,
rushing on him through the throng, that he fell on his back on the
ground; and thereafter he brought down Menon, and Iamenos, and Orestes
one after the other, to the bounteous earth.

While they were stripping from these the shining arms, the young men
who followed with Polydamas and Hector, they that were most in number
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall and set the ships on
fire, these still stood doubtful by the fosse, for as they were eager
to pass over a bird had appeared to them, an eagle of lofty flight,
skirting the host on the left hand. In its talons it bore a blood-red
monstrous snake, alive, and struggling still; yea, not yet had it
forgotten the joy of battle, but writhed backward and smote the bird
that held it on the breast, beside the neck, and the bird cast it from
him down to the earth, in sore pain, and dropped it in the midst of the
throng; then with a cry sped away down the gusts of the wind. And the
Trojans shuddered when they saw the gleaming snake lying in the midst
of them; an omen of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then verily Polydamas stood by brave Hector, and spake: “Hector, ever
dost thou rebuke me in the assemblies, though I counsel wisely; since
it by no means beseemeth one of the people to speak contrary to thee,
in council or in war, but always to increase thy power; but now again
will I say all that seemeth to me to be best. Let us not advance and
fight with the Danaans for the ships. For even thus, methinks, the end
will be, if indeed this bird hath come for the Trojans when they were
eager to cross the dyke, this eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host
on the left hand, bearing in his talons a blood-red monstrous snake,
yet living; then straightway left he hold of him, before he reached his
own nest, nor brought him home in the end to give to his nestlings.
Even so shall we, though we burst with mighty force the gates and wall
of the Achaians, and the Achaians give ground, even so we shall return
in disarray from the ships by the way we came; for many of the Trojans
shall we leave behind, whom the Achaians will slay with the sword, in
defence of the ships. Even so would a soothsayer interpret that in his
heart had clear knowledge of omens, and whom the people obeyed.”

Then Hector of the glancing helm lowered on him and said: “Polydamas,
that thou speakest is no longer pleasing to me; yea, thou knowest how
to conceive another counsel better than this. But if thou verily
speakest thus in earnest, then the gods themselves have utterly
destroyed thy wits; thou that bidst us forget the counsels of
loud-thundering Zeus, that himself promised me, and confirmed with a
nod of his head! But thou bidst us be obedient to birds long of wing,
whereto I give no heed, nor take any care thereof, whether they fare to
the right, to the dawn and to the sun, or to the left, to mist and
darkness. Nay, for us, let us trust to the counsel of mighty Zeus, who
is king over all mortals and immortals. One omen is best, to fight for
our own country. And wherefore dost thou fear war and battle? For if
all the rest of us be slain by the ships of the Argives, yet needst
thou not fear to perish, for thy heart is not warlike, nor enduring in
battle. But if thou dost hold aloof from the fight, or winnest any
other with thy words to turn him from war, straightway by my spear
shalt thou be smitten, and lose thy life.”

So spake he, and led on, and they followed with a wondrous din; and
Zeus that joyeth in the thunder roused from the hills of Ida, a blast
of wind, which bare the dust straight against the ships; and he made
weak the heart of the Achaians, but gave renown to the Trojans and to
Hector. Trusting then in his omens, and their might, they strove to
break the great wall of the Achaians. They dragged down the
machicolations [projecting galleries] of the towers, and overthrew the
battlements, and heaved up the projecting buttresses, that the Achaians
set first in the earth, to be the props of the towers. These they
overthrew, and hoped to break the wall of the Achaians. Nor even now
did the Danaans give ground from the path, but closed up the
battlements with shields of bulls’ hides, and cast from them at the
foemen as they went below the walls.

Now the two Aiantes went everywhere on the towers, ever urging, and
arousing the courage of the Achaians. One they would accost with
honeyed words, another with hard words they would rebuke, whomsoever
they saw utterly giving ground from the fight: “O friends, whosoever is
eminent, or whosoever is of middle station among the Argives, ay, or
lower yet, for in no wise are all men equal in war, now is there work
for all, and this yourselves well know. Let none turn back to the
ships, for that he hath heard one threatening aloud; nay, get ye
forward, and cheer another on, if perchance Olympian Zeus, the lord of
lightning, will grant us to drive back the assault, and push the foe to
the city.”

So these twain shouted in the front, and aroused the battle of the
Achaians. But as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter day, when Zeus
the Counsellor bath begun to snow, showing forth these arrows of his to
men, and he hath lulled the winds, and he snoweth continually, till he
hath covered the crests of the high hills, and the uttermost headlands,
and the grassy plains, and rich tillage of men; and the snow is
scattered over the havens and shores of the grey sea, and only the wave
as it rolleth in keeps off the snow, but all other things are swathed
over, when the shower of Zeus cometh heavily, so from both sides their
stones flew thick, some towards the Trojans, and some from the Trojans
against the Achaians, while both sides were smitten, and over all the
wall the din arose.

Yet never would the Trojans, then, and renowned Hector have broken the
gates of the wall, and the long bar, if Zeus the Counsellor had not
roused his son Sarpedon against the Argives, like a lion against the
kine of crooked horn. Straightway he held forth his fair round shield,
of hammered bronze, that the bronze-smith had hammered out, and within
had stitched many bulls’ hides with rivets of gold, all round the
circle, this held he forth, and shook two spears; and sped on his way,
like a mountain-nurtured lion, that long lacketh meat, and his brave
spirit urgeth him to make assail on the sheep, and come even against a
well-builded homestead. Nay, even if he find herdsmen thereby, guarding
the sheep with hounds and spears, yet hath he no mind to be driven
without an effort from the steading, but he either leapeth on a sheep,
and seizeth it, or himself is smitten in the foremost place with a dart
from a strong hand. So did his heart then urge on the godlike Sarpedon
to rush against the wall, and break through the battlements. And
instantly he spake to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos: “Glaukos, wherefore
have we twain the chiefest honour,—seats of honour, and messes, and
full cups in Lykia, and all men look on us as gods? And wherefore hold
we a great demesne by the banks of Xanthos, a fair demesne of
orchard-land, and wheat-bearing tilth? Therefore now it behoveth us to
take our stand in the first rank of the Lykians, and encounter fiery
battle, that certain of the well-corsleted Lykians may say, ‘Verily our
kings that rule Lykia be no inglorious men, they that eat fat sheep,
and drink the choice wine honey-sweet: nay, but they are also of
excellent might, for they war in the foremost ranks of the Lykians.’
Ah, friend, if once escaped from this battle we were for ever to be
ageless and immortal, neither would I fight myself in the foremost
ranks, nor would I send thee into the war that giveth men renown, but
now—for assuredly ten thousand fates of death do every way beset us,
and these no mortal may escape nor avoid—now let us go forward, whether
we shall give glory to other men, or others to us.”

So spake he, and Glaukos turned not apart, nor disobeyed him, and they
twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lykians.

Then Menestheus son of Peteos shuddered when he beheld them, for
against his tower they went, bringing with them ruin; and he looked
along the tower of the Achaians if perchance he might see any of the
leaders, that would ward off destruction from his comrades, and he
beheld the two Aiantes, insatiate of war, standing there, and Teukros
hard by, newly come from his hut; but he could not cry to be heard of
them, so great was the din, and the noise went up unto heaven of
smitten shields and helms with horse-hair crests, and of the gates, for
they had all been shut, and the Trojans stood beside them, and strove
by force to break them, and enter in. Swiftly then to Aias he sent the
herald Thootes: “Go, noble Thootes, and run, and call Aias: or rather
the twain, for that will be far the best of all, since quickly here
will there be wrought utter ruin. For hereby press the leaders of the
Lykians, who of old are fierce in strong battle. But if beside them too
war and toil arise, yet at least let the strong Telamonian Aias come
alone and let Teukros the skilled bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, and the herald listened and disobeyed him not, but started
and ran by the wall of the mail-clad Achaians, and came, and stood by
the Aiantes, and straightway spake: “Ye twain Aiantes, leaders of the
mail-clad Achaians, the dear son of Peteos, fosterling of Zeus, biddeth
you go thither, that, if it be but for a little while, ye may take your
part in battle: both of you he more desireth, for that will be far the
best of all, since quickly there will there be wrought utter ruin. For
thereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of old are fierce in
strong battle. But if beside you too war and toil arise, yet at least
let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone, and let Teukros the skilled
bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, nor did the strong Telamonian Aias disobey, but instantly
spake winged words to the son of Oileus: “Aias, do ye twain stand here,
thyself and strong Lykomedes, and urge the Danaans to war with all
their might; but I go thither, to take my part in battle, and quickly
will I come again, when I have well aided them.”

So spake Telamonian Aias and departed, and Teukros went with him, his
brother by the same father, and with them Pandion bare the bended bow
of Teukros.

Now when they came to the tower of great-hearted Menestheus, passing
within the wall,—and to men sore pressed they came,—the foe were
climbing upon the battlements, like a dark whirlwind, even the strong
leaders and counsellors of the Lykians; and they hurled together into
the war and the battle-cry arose. Now first did Aias Telamol’s son slay
a man, Epikles great of heart, the comrade of Sarpedon. With a jagged
stone he smote him, a great stone that lay uppermost within the wall,
by the battlements. Not lightly could a man hold it in both hands,
however strong in his youth, of such mortals as now are, but Aias
lifted it, and cast it from above, and shattered the helm of fourfold
crest, and broke the bones of the head, and he fell like a diver from
the lofty tower, and his life left his bones. And Teukros smote
Glaukos, the strong son of Hippolochos, as he came on, with an arrow
from the lofty wall; even where he saw his shoulder bare he smote him,
and made him cease from delight in battle. Back from the wall he leapt
secretly, lest any of the Achaians should see him smitten, and speak
boastfully. But sorrow came on Sarpedon when Glaukos departed, so soon
as he was aware thereof, but he forgot not the joy of battle. He aimed
at Alkmaon, son of Thestor, with the spear, and smote him, and drew out
the spear. And Alkmaon following the spear fell prone, and his
bronze-dight arms rang round him. Then Sarpedon seized with strong
hands the battlement, and dragged, and it all gave way together, while
above the wall was stripped bare, and made a path for many.

Then Aias and Teukros did encounter him: Teukros smote him with an
arrow, on the bright baldric of his covering shield, about the breast,
but Zeus warded off the Fates from his son, that he should not be
overcome beside the ships’ sterns. Then Aias leaped on and smote his
shield, nor did the spear pass clean through, yet shook he Sarpedon in
his eagerness. He gave ground a little way from the battlement, yet
retreated not wholly, since his heart hoped to win renown. Then he
turned and cried to the godlike Lykians: “O Lykians, wherefore thus are
ye slack in impetuous valour. Hard it is for me, stalwart as I am,
alone to break through, and make a path to the ships, nay, follow hard
after me, for the more men, the better work.”

So spake he, and they, dreading the rebuke of their king, pressed on
the harder around the counsellor and king. And the Argives on the other
side made strong their battalions within the wall, and mighty toil
began for them. For neither could the strong Lykians burst through the
wall of the Danaans, and make a way to the ships, nor could the warlike
Danaans drive back the Lykians from the wall, when once they had drawn
near thereto. But as two men contend about the marches of their land,
with measuring rods in their hands, in a common field, when in narrow
space they strive for equal shares, even so the battlements divided
them, and over those they smote the round shields of ox hide about the
breasts of either side, and the fluttering bucklers. And many were
wounded in the flesh with the ruthless bronze, whensoever the back of
any of the warriors was laid bare as he turned, ay, and many clean
through the very shield. Yea, everywhere the towers and battlements
swam with the blood of men shed on either side, by Trojans and
Achaians. But even so they could not put the Argives to rout, but they
held their ground, as an honest woman that laboureth with her hands
holds the balance, and raises the weight and the wool together,
balancing them, that she may win scant wages for her children; so
evenly was strained their war and battle, till the moment when Zeus
gave the greater renown to Hector, son of Priam, who was the first to
leap within the wall of the Achaians. In a piercing voice he cried
aloud to the Trojans: “Rise, ye horse-taming Trojans, break the wall of
the Argives, and cast among the ships fierce blazing fire.”

So spake he, spurring them on, and they all heard him with their ears,
and in one mass rushed straight against the wall, and with sharp spears
in their hands climbed upon the machicolations of the towers. And
Hector seized and carried a stone that lay in front of the gates, thick
in the hinder part, but sharp at point: a stone that not the two best
men of the people, such as mortals now are, could lightly lift from the
ground on to a wain, but easily he wielded it alone, for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos made it light for him. And as when a
shepherd lightly beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand,
and little doth it burden him, so Hector lifted the stone, and bare it
straight against the doors that closely guarded the stubborn-set
portals, double gates and tall, and two cross bars held them within,
and one bolt fastened them. And he came, and stood hard by, and firmly
planted himself, and smote them in the midst, setting his legs well
apart, that his cast might lack no strength. And he brake both the
hinges, and the stone fell within by reason of its weight, and the
gates rang loud around, and the bars held not, and the doors burst this
way and that beneath the rush of the stone. Then glorious Hector leaped
in, with face like the sudden night, shining in wondrous mail that was
clad about his body, and with two spears in his hands. No man that met
him could have held him back when once he leaped within the gates: none
but the gods, and his eyes shone with fire. Turning towards the throng
he cried to the Trojans to overleap the wall, and they obeyed his
summons, and speedily some overleaped the wall, and some poured into
the fair-wrought gateways, and the Danaans fled in fear among the
hollow ships, and a ceaseless clamour arose.

