BOOK II.

How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly of the
Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of the names and
numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the Trojans.


Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his
heart how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians’ ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit,
to send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: “Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians’ fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang.”

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians’ fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

“Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee.”

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his
mind things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to
take Priam’s city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the
plans that Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and
wailing on Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn
fights. Then woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his
ears. So he rose up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and
bright, and cast around him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering
feet he bound his fair sandals, and over his shoulders cast his
silver-studded sword, and grasped his sires’ sceptre, imperishable for
ever, wherewith he took his way amid the mail-clad Achaians’ ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds
summon to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those
summon, and these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship
of king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed
his cunning counsel: “Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to
me in my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly
Nestor was very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over
my head and charged me saying: ‘Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer
of horses? To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a
counsellor, to whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But
now hearken straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus,
who though he be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth
thee call to arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that
now thou mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the
immortals that dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in
counsel, since Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and
over the Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep
this in thy heart.’ So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet
sleep left me. So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of
the Achaians. But first I will speak to make trial of them as is
fitting, and bid them flee with their benched ships; only do ye from
this side and from that speak to hold them back.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor,
who was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them
and said: “My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any
other of the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false
thing, and rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of
all Achaians avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms
as we may the sons of the Achaians.”

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly
clustering among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some
on that fly thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach
marched forth their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly.
And in their midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them
to go; and so they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an
uproar, and the earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and
there was turmoil. Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if
perchance they might refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings,
the fosterlings of Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit,
and keep them to their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord
Agamemnon bearing his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously.
Hephaistos gave it to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to
the messenger-god the slayer of Argus [Or, possibly, “the
swift-appearing”]; and king Hermes gave it to Pelops the charioteer,
and Pelops again gave it to Atreus shepherd of the host. And Atreus
dying left it to Thyestes rich in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left
it to Agamemnon to bear, that over many islands and all Argos he should
be lord. Thereon he leaned and spake his saying to the Argives:

“My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares’ company, Zeus Kronos’ son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart
is he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not
till I had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that
he planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured,
with the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty
Zeus, who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay
low; for his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come
after to hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus
vainly warred a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end
thereof is yet seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and
Trojans, to swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the
Trojans should gather together all that have their dwellings in the
city, and we Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every
company choose a Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a
cup-bearer: so much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the
Trojans that dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even
warriors that wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me
perforce, and for all my will suffer me not to waste the populous
citadel of Ilios. Already have nine years of great Zeus passed away,
and our ships’ timbers have rotted and the tackling is loosed; while
there our wives and little children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet
is our task utterly unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come,
even as I bid let us all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear
native land; for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout
the multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly
swayed like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south
wind raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even
as when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent
blast, and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they
with shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their
feet rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to
seize the ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out
the launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: “Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed
flee homeward to their dear native land over the sea’s broad back? But
they would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos, for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away
from his dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the
mail-clad Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man,
neither suffer them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus
of many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched
ships to flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to
Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake
many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land.
But go thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with
gentle words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their
curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybated of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went
to meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre
of his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: “Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus’ son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them.”

But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: “Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom
the son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the
sceptre and judgments, that he may rule among you”].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled speech, whose mind was
full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
“Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene’er we take a
town. Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of
the horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it
is not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles’ mind, but he is slack;
else this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last.”

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with
hard words rebuked him: “Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator
though thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against
kings. For I deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with
the sons of Atreus came before Ilios. Therefore were it well that thou
shouldest not have kings in thy mouth as thou talkest, and utter
revilings against them and be on the watch for departure. We know not
yet clearly how these things shall be, whether we sons of the Achaians
shall return for good or ill. Therefore now dost thou revile
continually Agamemnon son of Atreus, shepherd of the host, because the
Danaan warriors give him many gifts, and so thou talkest tauntingly.
But I will tell thee plain, and that I say shall even be brought to
pass: if I find thee again raving as now thou art, then may Odysseus’
head no longer abide upon his shoulders, nor may I any more be called
father of Telemachos, if I take thee not and strip from thee thy
garments, thy mantle and tunic that cover thy nakedness, and for
thyself send thee weeping to the fleet ships, and beat thee out of the
assembly with shameful blows.”

So spake he, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders: and he
bowed down and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal stood up
from his back beneath the golden sceptre. Then he sat down and was
amazed, and in pain with helpless look wiped away the tear. But the
rest, though they were sotty, laughed lightly at him, and thus would
one speak looking at another standing by: “Go to, of a truth Odysseus
hath wrought good deeds without number ere now, standing foremost in
wise counsels and setting battle in array, but now is this thing the
best by far that he hath wrought among the Argives, to wit, that he
hath stayed this prating railer from his harangues. Never again,
forsooth, will his proud soul henceforth bid him revile the kings with
slanderous words.”

So said the common sort; but up rose Odysseus waster of cities, with
sceptre in his hand. And by his side bright-eyed Athene in the likeness
of a herald bade the multitude keep silence, that the sons of the
Achaians, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words
together and give heed to his counsel. He of good intent made harangue
to them and said: “Atreides, now surely are the Achaians for making
thee, O king, most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfil
the promise that they pledged thee when they still were marching hither
from horse-pasturing Argos; that thou shouldest not return till thou
hadst laid well-walled Ilios waste. For like young children or widow
women do they wail each to the other of returning home. Yea, here is
toil to make a man depart disheartened. For he that stayeth away but
one single month far from his wife in his benched ship fretteth himself
when winter storms and the furious sea imprison him; but for us, the
ninth year of our stay here is upon us in its course. Therefore do I
not marvel that the Achaians should fret beside their beaked ships; yet
nevertheless is it shameful to wait long and to depart empty. Be of
good heart, my friends, and wait a while, until we learn whether
Kalchas be a true prophet or no. For this thing verily we know well in
our hearts, and ye all are witnesses thereof, even as many as the fates
of death have not borne away. It was as it were but yesterday or the
day before that the Achaians’ ships were gathering in Aulis, freighted
with trouble for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring
were offering on the holy altars unblemished hecatombs to the
immortals, beneath a fair plane-tree whence flowed bright water, when
there was seen a great portent: a snake blood-red on the back,
terrible, whom the god of Olympus himself had sent forth to the light
of day, sprang from beneath the altar and darted to the plane-tree. Now
there were there the brood of a sparrow, tender little ones, upon the
topmost branch, nestling beneath the leaves; eight were they and the
mother of the little ones was the ninth, and the snake swallowed these
cheeping pitifully. And the mother fluttered around wailing for her
dear little ones; but he coiled himself and caught her by the wing as
she screamed about him. Now when he had swallowed the sparrow’s little
ones and the mother with them, the god who revealed him made of him a
sign; for the son of crooked-counselling Kronos turned him to stone,
and we stood by and marvelled to see what was done. So when the dread
portent brake in upon the hecatombs of the gods, then did Kalchas
forthwith prophesy, and said: ‘Why hold ye your peace, ye
flowing-haired Achaians? To us hath Zeus the counsellor shown this
great sign, late come, of late fulfilment, the fame whereof shall never
perish. Even as he swallowed the sparrow’s little ones and herself, the
eight wherewith the mother that bare the little ones was the ninth, so
shall we war there so many years, but in the tenth year shall we take
the wide-wayed city.’ So spake the seer; and now are all these things
being fulfilled. So come, abide ye all, ye well-greaved Achaians, even
where ye are, until we have taken the great city of Priam.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round the ships
echoed terribly to the voice of the Achaians as they praised the saying
of god-like Odysseus. And then spake among them knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: “Out on it; in very truth ye hold assembly like silly boys
that have no care for deeds of war. What shall come of our covenants
and our oaths? Let all counsels be cast into the fire and all devices
of warriors and the pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For we are vainly striving with words
nor can we find any device at all, for all our long tarrying here. Son
of Atreus, do thou still, as erst, keep steadfast purpose and lead the
Argives amid the violent fray; and for these, let them perish, the one
or two Achaians that take secret counsel—to depart to Argos first,
before they know whether the promise of aegis-bearing Zeus be a lie or
no. Yea, for I say that most mighty Kronion pledged us his word that
day when the Argives embarked upon their fleet ships, bearing unto the
Trojans death and fate; for by his lightning upon our right he
manifested signs of good. Therefore let Trojal’s wife and paid back his
strivings and groans for Helel’s sake. But if any man is overmuch
desirous to depart homewards, let him lay his hand upon his decked
black ship, that before all men he may encounter death and fate. But do
thou, my king, take good counsel thyself, and whate’er it be, shall not
be cast away. Separate thy warriors by tribes and by clans, Agamemnon,
that clan may give aid to clan and tribe to tribe. If thou do thus and
the Achaians hearken to thee, then wilt thou know who among thy
captains and who of the common sort is a coward, and who too is brave;
for they will fight each after their sort. So wilt thou know whether it
is even by divine command that thou shalt not take the city, or by the
baseness of thy warriors and their ill skill in battle.”

And lord Agamemnon answered and said to him: “Verily hast thou again
outdone the sons of the Achaians in speech, old man. Ah, father Zeus
and Athene and Apollo, would that among the Achaians I had ten such
councillors; then would the city of king Priam soon bow beneath our
hands, captive and wasted. But aegis-bearing Zeus, the son of Kronos,
hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth my lot amid fruitless
wranglings and strifes. For in truth I and Achilles fought about a
damsel with violent words, and I was first to be angry; but if we can
only be at one in council, then will there no more be any putting off
the day of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant. But now go ye
to your meal that we may join battle. Let each man sharpen well his
spear and bestow well his shield, and let him well give his
fleet-footed steeds their meal, and look well to his chariot on every
side and take thought for battle, that all day long we may contend in
hateful war. For of respite shall there intervene no, not a whit, only
that the coming of night shall part the fury of warriors. On each mal’s
breast shall the baldrick of his covering shield be wet with sweat, and
his hand shall grow faint about the spear, and each mal’s horse shall
sweat as he draweth the polished chariot. And whomsoever I perceive
minded to tarry far from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him
shall there be no hope hereafter to escape the dogs and birds of prey.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, like to a wave on a steep
shore, when the south wind cometh and stirreth it; even on a jutting
rock, that is never left at peace by the waves of all winds that rise
from this side and from that. And they did sacrifice each man to one of
the everlasting gods, praying for escape from death and the tumult of
battle. But Agamemnon king of men slew a fat bull of five years to most
mighty Kronion, and called the elders, the princes of the Achaian host,
Nestor first and king Idomeneus, and then the two Aiantes and Tydeus’
son, and sixthly Odysseus peer of Zeus in counsel. And Menelaos of the
loud war-cry came to him unbidden, for he knew in his heart how his
brother toiled. Then stood they around the bull and took the
barley-meal. And Agamemnon made his prayer in their midst and said:
“Zeus, most glorious, most great, god of the storm-cloud, that dwellest
in the heaven, vouchsafe that the sun set not upon us nor the darkness
come near, till I have laid low upon the earth Priam’s palace smirched
with smoke, and burnt the doorways thereof with consuming fire, and
rent on Hector’s breast his doublet cleft with the blade; and about him
may full many of his comrades prone in the dust bite the earth.”

So spake he, but not as yet would Kronion grant him fulfilment; he
accepted the sacrifice, but made toil to wax increasingly.

Now when they had prayed and sprinkled the barley-meal they first drew
back the bull’s head and cut his throat and flayed him, and cut slices
from the thigh’s and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and
laid raw collops thereon. And these they burnt on cleft wood stript of
leaves, and spitted the vitals and held them over Hephaistos’ flame.
Now when the thighs were burnt and they had tasted the vitals, then
sliced they all the rest and pierced it through with spits, and roasted
it carefully and drew all off again. So when they had rest from the
task and had made ready the banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart
aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when they had put away from them
the desire of meat and drink, then did knightly Nestor of Gerenia open
his saying to them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men,
let us not any more hold long converse here, nor for long delay the
work that god putteth in our hands; but come, let the heralds of the
mail-clad Achaians make proclamation to the folk and gather them
throughout the ships; and let us go thus in concert through the wide
host of the Achaians, that the speedier we may arouse keen war.”

So spake he and Agamemnon king of men disregarded not. Straightway he
bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to battle the flowing-haired
Achaians. So those summoned and these gathered with all speed. And the
kings, the fosterlings of Zeus that were about Atreus’ son, eagerly
marshalled them, and bright-eyed Athene in the midst, bearing the holy
aegis that knoweth neither age nor death, whereon wave an hundred
tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven and each one an hundred oxen
worth. Therewith she passed dazzling through the Achaian folk, urging
them forth; and in every mal’s heart she roused strength to battle
without ceasing and to fight. So was war made sweeter to them than to
depart in their hollow ships to their dear native land. Even as
ravaging fire kindleth a boundless forest on a mountail’s peaks, and
the blaze is seen from afar, even so as they marched went the dazzling
gleam from the innumerable bronze through the sky even unto the
heavens.

And as the many tribes of feathered birds, wild geese or cranes or
long-necked swans, on the Asian mead by Kaystrios’ stream, fly hither
and thither joying in their plumage, and with loud cries settle ever
onwards, and the mead resounds; even so poured forth the many tribes of
warriors from ships and huts into the Skamandrian plain. And the earth
echoed terribly beneath the tread of men and horses. So stood they in
the flowery Skamandrian plain, unnumbered as are leaves and flowers in
their season. Even as the many tribes of thick flies that hover about a
herdsmal’s steading in the spring season, when milk drencheth the
pails, even in like number stood the flowing-haired Achaians upon the
plain in face of the Trojans, eager to rend them asunder. And even as
the goatherds easily divide the ranging flocks of goats when they
mingle in the pasture, so did their captains marshal them on this side
and that, to enter into the fray, and in their midst lord Agamemnon,
his head and eyes like unto Zeus whose joy is in the thunder, and his
waist like unto Ares and his breast unto Poseidon. Even as a bull
standeth out far foremost amid the herd, for his is pre-eminent amid
the pasturing kine, even such did Zeus make Atreides on that day,
pre-eminent among many and chief amid heroes.

Tell me now, ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus—seeing that
ye are goddesses and are at hand and know all things, but we hear only
a rumour and know not anything—who were the captains of the Danaans and
their lords. But the common sort could I not number nor name, nay, not
if ten tongues were mine and ten mouths, and a voice unwearied, and my
heart of bronze within me, did not the Muses of Olympus, daughters of
aegis-bearing Zeus, put into my mind all that came to Ilios. So will I
tell the captains of the ships and all the ships in order.

Of the Boiotians Peneleos and Leitos were captains, and Arkesilaos and
Prothoenor and Klonios; these were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky
Aulis and Schoinos and Skolos and Eteonos full of ridges, Thespeia and
Graia and Mykalessos with wide lawns; and that dwelt about Harma and
Eilesion and Erythrai, and they that possessed Eleon and Peteon and
Hyle, Okalea and the stablished fortress of Medeon, Kopai and Eutresis
and Thisbe haunt of doves; and they of Koroneia and grassy Haliartos,
and that possessed Plataia and that dwelt in Glisas, and that possessed
the stablished fortress of lesser Thebes and holy Onchestos, Poseidol’s
bright grove; and that possessed Arne rich in vineyards, and Mideia and
sacred Nisa and Anthedon on the furthest borders. Of these there came
fifty ships, and in each one embarked young men of the Boiotians an
hundred and twenty. And they that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenos of
the Minyai were led of Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons of Ares, whom
Astyoche conceived of the mighty god in the palace of Aktor son of
Azeus, having entered her upper chamber, a stately maiden; for mighty
Ares lay with her privily. And with them sailed thirty hollow ships.

And the Phokians were led of Schedios and Epistrophos, sons of
great-hearted Iphitos son of Naubolos; these were they that possessed
Kyparissos and rocky Pytho and sacred Krisa and Daulis and Panopeus,
and they that dwelt about Anemoreia and Hyampolis, yea, and they that
lived by the goodly river Kephisos and possessed Lilaia by Kephisos’
springs. And with them followed thirty black ships. So they marshalled
the ranks of the Phokians diligently, and had their station hard by the
Boiotians on the left.

And of the Lokrians the fleet son of Oileus was captain, Aias the less,
that was not so great as was the Telamonian Aias but far less. Small
was he, with linen corslet, but with the spear he far outdid all the
Hellenes and Achaians. These were they that dwelt in Kynos and Opus and
Kalliaros and Bessa and Skarphe and lovely Augeiai and Tarphe and
Thronion, about the streams of Boagrios. And with Aias followed forty
black ships of the Lokrians that dwell over against holy Euboia.

And the Abantes breathing fury, they that possessed Euboia and Chalkis
and Eiretria and Histiaia rich in vines, and Kerinthos by the sea and
the steep fortress of Dios and they that possessed Karytos, and they
that dwelt in Styra, all these again were led of Elephenor of the stock
of Ares, even the son of Chalkodon, and captain of the proud Abantes.
And with him followed the fleet Abantes with hair flowing behind,
spearmen eager with ashen shafts outstretched to tear the corslets on
the breasts of the foes. And with him forty black ships followed.

And they that possessed the goodly citadel of Athens, the domain of
Erechtheus the high-hearted, whom erst Athene daughter of Zeus fostered
when Earth, the grain-giver, brought him to birth;—and she gave him a
resting-place in Athens in her own rich sanctuary; and there the sons
of the Athenians worship him with bulls and rams as the years turn in
their courses—these again were led of Menestheus son of Peteos. And
there was no man upon the face of earth that was like him for the
marshalling of horsemen and warriors that bear the shield. Only Nestor
rivalled him, for he was the elder by birth. And with him rivalled him,
for he was the elder by birth. And with him fifty black ships followed.

And Aias led twelve ships from Salamis, [and brought them and set them
where the battalions of the Athenians stood.]

And they that possessed Argos and Tiryns of the great walls, Hermione
and Asine that enfold the deep gulf, Troizen and Eionai and Epidauros
full of vines, and the youths of the Achaians that possessed Aigina and
Mases, these were led of Diomedes of the loud war-cary and Sthenelos,
dear son of famous Kapaneus. And the third with them came Euryalos, a
godlike warrior, the son of king Mekisteus son of Talaos. But Diomedes
of the loud war-cry was lord over all. And with them eighty black ships
followed.

And of them that possessed the stablished fortress of Mykene and
wealthy Corinth and stablished Kleonai, and dwelt in Orneiai and lovely
Araithyrea and Sikyon, wherein Adrestos was king at the first; and of
them that possessed Hyperesie and steep Gonoessa and Pellene, and dwelt
about Aigion and through all the coast-land and about broad Helike, of
them did lord Agamemnon son of Atreus lead an hundred ships. With him
followed most and goodliest folk by far; and in their midst himself was
clad in flashing bronze, all glorious, and was pre-eminent amid all
warriors, because he was goodliest and led folk far greatest in number.

And of them that possessed Lakedaimon lying low amid the rifted hills,
and Pharis and Sparta and Messe, the haunt of doves, and dwelt in
Bryseiai and lovely Augeiai, and of them too that possessed Amyklai and
the sea-coast fortress of Helos, and that possessed Laas and dwelt
about Oitylos, of these was the king’s brother leader, even Menelaos of
the loud war-cry, leader of sixty ships, and these were arrayed apart.
And himself marched among them confident in his zeal, urging his men to
battle: and his heart most of all was set to take vengeance for his
strivings and groans for Helel’s sake [Or, “for Helel’s searchings of
heart and groans.”].

And of them that dwelt in Pylos and lovely Arene and Thryon the
fording-place of Alpheios, and in established Aipy, and were
inhabitants of Kyparisseis and Amphigeneia and Pteleos and Helos and
Dorion—where the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian, and made an end of
his singing, as he was faring from Oichalia, from Eurytos the
Oichalian; for he averred with boasting that he would conquer, even did
the Muses themselves sing against him, the daughters of aegis-bearing
Zeus; but they in their anger maimed him, moreover they took from him
the high gift of song and made him to forget his harping—of all these
was knightly Nestor of Gerenia leader, and with him sailed ninety
hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Arkadia beneath the steep mountain of
Kyllene, beside the tomb of Aipytos, where are warriors that fight hand
to hand; and of them that dwelt in Pheneos and Orchomenos abounding in
flocks, and Rhipe and Stratie and windy Enispe, and that possessed
Tegea and lovely Mantineia, and possessed Stymphelos and dwelt in
Parhasie, of these was Ankaios’ son lord Agapenor leader, even of sixty
ships; and in each ship embarked many Arkadian warriors skilled in
fight. For Agamemnon king of men himself gave them benched ships
wherewith to cross the wine-dark sea, even he the son of Atreus; for
matters of seafaring concerned them not.

And they too that inhabited Bouprasion and goodly Elis, so much thereof
as Hyrmine and Myrsinos upon the borders and the Olenian rock and
Aleision bound between them, of these men there were four captains, and
ten swift ships followed each one, and many Epeians embarked thereon.
So some were led of Amphimachos and Thalpios, of the lineage of Aktor,
sons one of Kteatos and one of Eurytos; and of some was stalwart Diores
captain, son of Amarynkes; and of the fourth company godlike Polyxeinos
was captain, son of king Agasthenes Augeias’ son.

And them of Doulichion and the holy Echinean Isles that stand beyond
the sea over against Elis, even these did Meges lead, the peer of Ares,
Phyleides to wit, for he was begotten of knightly Phyleus dear to Zeus,
him that erst changed his habitation to Doulichion for anger against
his father. And with him followed forty black ships.

And Odysseus led the great-hearted Kephallenians, them that possessed
Ithaka and Neriton with quivering leafage, and dwelt in Krokyleia and
rugged Aigilips, and them that possessed Zakynthos and that dwelt in
Samos, and possessed the mainland and dwelt in the parts over against
the isles. Them did Odysseus lead, the peer of Zeus in counsel, and
with him followed twelve ships with vermillion prow.

And of the Aitolians Thoas was captain, the son of Andraimon, even of
them that dwelt in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene, and Chalkis on the
sea-shore and rocky Kalydon. For the sons of great-hearted Oineus were
no more, neither did he still live, and golden-haired Meleagros was
dead, to whose hands all had been committed, for him to be king of the
Aitolians. And with Thoas there followed forty black ships.

And of the Cretans Idomeneus the famous spearman was leader, even of
them that possessed Knosos and Gortys of the great walls, Lyktos and
Miletos and chalky Lykastos and Phaistos and Rhytion, stablished cities
all; and of all others that dwelt in Crete of the hundred cities. Of
these men was Idomeneus the famous spearman leader, and Meriones peer
of the man-slaying war-god. With these followed eighty black ships.

And Tlepolemmos, Herakles’ son goodly and tall, led from Rhodes nine
ships of the lordly Rhodians, that dwelt in Rhodes in threefold
ordering, in Lindos and Ialysos and chalky Kameiros. These were led of
Tlepolemos the famous spearman, that was born to great Herakles by
Astyocheia, whom he had brought away from Ephyre by the river Selleeis,
when he laid waste many cities of strong men, fosterlings of Zeus. Now
when Tlepolemos had grown to manhood within the strong palace walls,
anon he slew his own father’s dear uncle, an old man now, Likymnios of
the stock of Ares. Then with speed built he ships and gathered much
folk together, and went fleeing across the deep, because the other sons
and grandsons of great Herakles threatened him. So he came to Rhodes a
wanderer, enduring hardships, and his folk settled by kinship in three
tribes, and were loved of Zeus that is king among gods and men; and
Kronion poured upon them exceeding great wealth.

Nireus, moreover, led three trim ships from Syme, Nireus son of Aglaia
and king Charopos, Nireus the most beauteous man that came up under
Ilios of all the Danaans, after the noble son of Peleus. Howbeit he was
a weakling, and a scanty host followed him.

And of them that possessed Nisyros and Krapathos and Kasos and Kos the

city of Eurypylos, and the Kalydnian Isles, of them Pheidippos and

Antiphos were leaders, the two sons of king Thessalos son of Herakles.

With them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

Now all moreover that dwelt in the Pelasgian Argos and inhabited Alos
and Alope and Trachis and possessed Phthia and Hellas the home of fair
women, and were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaians; of all
these, even fifty ships, Achilles was captain. But these took no
thought of noisy war; for there was no man to array them in line of
battle. For fleet-footed goodly Achilles lay idle amid the ships, wroth
for the sake of a damsel, Briseis of the lovely hair, whom he had won
from Lyrnessos and the walls of Thebe, and overthrew Mynes and
Epistrophos, warriors that bare the spear, sons of king Euenos Selepos’
son. For her sake lay Achilles sorrowing; but soon was he to arise
again.

And of them that possessed Phylake and flowery Pyrasos, Demeter’s
sanctuary, and Iton mother of flocks, and Antron by the sea-shore and
Pteleos couched in grass, of all these was warlike Protesilaos leader
while yet he lived; but now ere this the black earth held him fast. His
wife with marred visage was left alone in Phylake, yea, and his bridal
chamber half builded; for a Dardanian warrior slew him as he leapt from
his ship far first of the Achaians. Yet neither were his men
leaderless, though they sorrowed for their leader; for Podarkes of the
stock of Ares marshalled them, son of Phylakos’ son Iphiklos was he,
the lord of many flocks, own brother of great-hearted Protesilaos, and
younger-born than he: but the other was alike the elder and the braver,
even Protesilaos, that mighty man of war. Yet did not the host lack at
all a leader, only they yearned for the noble dead. With him followed
forty black ships.

And of them that dwelt in Pherai by the Boibeian mere, in Boibe and

Glaphyre and stablished Iolkos, of them, even eleven ships, Admetos’

dear son was leader, Eumelos whom Alkestis, fair among women, bare to

Admetos, she that was most beauteous to look upon of the daughters of

Pelias.

And of them that dwelt in Methone and Thaumakie, and possessed Meliboia
and rugged Olizon, of these, even seven ships, was Philoktetes leader,
the cunning archer; and in each ship sailed fifty oarsmen skilled to
fight amain with the bow. But their captain lay enduring sore pain in
the isle of goodly Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaians left him sick
of a grievous wound from a deadly water-snake. There lay he pining; yet
were the Argives soon to bethink them beside their ships of king
Philoktetes. Yet neither were his men leaderless, only they sorrowed
for their leader; but Medon marshalled them, Oileus’ bastard son, whom
Rhene bare to Oileus waster of cities.

And of them that possessed Trikke and terraced ithome and that
possessed Oichalia city of Eurytos the Oichalian, of these again
Asklepios’ two sons were leaders, the cunning leeches Podaleirios and
Machaon. And with them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Ormenios and the fountain of Hypereia, and
possessed Asterion and the white crests of Titanos, of these was
Eurypylos leader, Euaimol’s glorious son; and with him, forty black
ships followed.

And of them that possessed Argissa and dwelt in Gyrtona, Orthe and
Elone and the white city of Olooson, of these was captain unflinching
Polypoites, son of Peirithoos that immortal Zeus begat: and Polypoites
did famed Hippodameia conceive of Peirithoos on that day when he took
vengeance of the shaggy wild folk, and thrust them forth from Pelion
and drave them to the Aithikes. And Polypoites ruled not alone, but
with him was Leonteus of the stock of Ares, son of high-hearted Koronos
Kaineus’ son. And with them forty black ships followed.

And Gouneus from Kyphos led two-and-twenty ships, and with him followed
the Enienes and unflinching Peraibians that had pitched their homes
about wintry Dodona, and dwelt on the tilth about lovely Titaresios
that poureth his fair-flowing stream into Peneios. Yet doth he not
mingle with the silver eddies of Peneios, but floweth on over him like
unto oil, seeing that he is an offspring from the water of Styx, the
dread river of the oath.

And the Magnetes were led of Prothoos son of Tenthredon, even they that
dwelt about Peneios and Pelion with trembling leafage. These did fleet
Prothoos lead, and with him forty black ships followed.

So these were the leaders of the Danaans and their captains. Now tell
me, O Muse, who among them was first and foremost, of warriors alike
and horses that followed the sons of Atreus. Of horses they of Pheres’
son were far goodliest, those that Eumelos drave, swift as birds, like
of coat, like of age, matched to the measure of a levelling line across
their backs. These were reared in Peraia by Apollo of the silver bow,
two mares carrying onward the terror of battle. But of warriors far
best was the Telamonian Aias, while the wrath of Achilles yet endured;
for he was greatest of all, he and his horses that bore him, even
Peleus’ noble son. But he lay idle among his seafaring ships, in sore
wrath against Agamemnon Atreus’ son, shepherd of the host; and his folk
along the sea-shore sported with quoits and with casting of javelins
and archery; and the horses each beside his own chariot stood idle,
champing clover and parsley of the marsh, and their lords’ chariots lay
well covered up within the huts, while the men yearned for their
warrior chief, and wandered hither and thither through the camp and
fought not.

So marched they then as though all the land were consuming with fire;
and the earth groaned beneath them as at the wrath of Zeus whose joy is
in the thunder, when he lasheth the earth about Typhoeus in the country
of the Arimoi, where men say is Typhoeus’ couch. Even so groaned the
earth aloud at their tread as they went: and with speed advanced they
across the plain.

Now fleet Iris the wind-footed went to the Trojans, a messenger from
aegis-bearing Zeus, with a grievous message. These were holding
assembly at Priam’s gate, being gathered all together both young men
and old. And fleet-footed Iris stood hard by and spake to them; and she
made her voice like to the voice of Polites son of Priam, who was the
sentinel of the Trojans and was wont to sit trusting in his fleetness
upon the barrow of Aisyetes of old, and on the top thereof wait the
sallying of the Achaians forth from their ships. Even in his likeness
did fleet-footed Iris speak to Priam: “Old man, words beyond number are
still pleasant to thee as erst in the days of peace; but war without
respite is upon us. Of a truth have I very oft ere now entered into
battles of the warriors, yet have I never seen so goodly a host and so
great; for in the very likeness of the leaves of the forest or the
sands of the sea are they marching along the plain to fight against the
city. But Hector, thee do I charge beyond all to do even as I shall
say. Seeing that the allies are very many throughout Priam’s great
city, and diverse men, being scattered abroad, have diverse tongues;
therefore let each one give the word to those whose chieftain he is,
and them let him lead forth and have the ordering of his countrymen.”

So spake she, and Hector failed not to know the voice of the goddess,
and straightway dismissed the assembly, and they rushed to arms. And
the gates were thrown open wide, and the host issued forth, footmen and
horsemen, and mighty din arose.

Now there is before the city a certain steep mound apart in the plain,
with a clear way about it on this side and on that; and men indeed call
this “Batieia,” but the immortals call it “The tomb of lithe Myrine.”
There did the Trojans and their allies divide their companies.

Amid the Trojans great Hector of the glancing helm was leader, the son
of Priam; with him the greatest hosts by far and the goodliest were
arrayed, eager warriors of the spear.

But the Dardanians were led of the princely son of Anchises, Aineias,
whom bright Aphrodite conceived to Anchises amids the spurs of Ida, a
goddess wedded to a mortal. Neither was he alone; with him were
Antenor’s two sons, Archelochos and Akamas, well skilled in all the
ways of war.

And of them that dwelt in Zeleia beneath the nethermost foot of Ida,
the men of substance that drink the dark waters of Aisepos, even the
Troes; of these Lykaol’s glorious son was leader, Pandaros, to whom
Apollo himself gave the bow.

And of them that possessed Adresteia and the land of Apaisos and
possessed Pityeia and the steep hill of Tereia, of these Adrestos was
captain, and Amphios of the linen corslet, the two sons of Merops of
Perkote, that beyond all men knew soothsaying, and would have hindered
his children marching to murderous war. But they gave him no heed, for
the fates of black death led them on.

And they that dwelt about Perkote and Praktios and possessed Sestos and
Abydos and bright Arisbe, these were led of Hyrtakos’ son Asios, a
prince of men, Asios son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall sorrel steeds
brought from Arisbe, from the river Selleeis.

And Hippothoos led the tribes of the Pelasgians that fight with spears,

them that inhabited deep-soiled Larisa. These were led of Hippothoos
and

Pylaios of the stock of Ares, twain sons of Pelasgian Lethos son of

Teutamos.

And the Thracians were led of Akamas and hero Peiroos, even all they
that the strong stream of Hellespont shutteth in. And Euphemos was
captain of the Kikonian spearmen, the son of Troizenos Keos’ son,
fosterling of Zeus.

But Pyraichmes led the Paionians with curving bows, from far away in
Amydon, from the broad stream of Axios, Axios whose water is the
fairest that floweth over the face of the earth.

And Pylaimenes of rugged heart led the Paphlagonians from the land of
the Eneti, whence is the breed of wild mules. This folk were they that
possessed Kytoros and dwelt about Sesamon, and inhabited their famed
dwellings round the river Parthenios and Kromna and Aigialos and lofty
Erythini.

And the Alizones were led of Odios and Epistrophos, from far away in

Alybe, where is the birthplace of silver.

And the Mysians were led of Chromis and Ennomos the augur, yet with all
his auguries warded he not black fate from him, but was vanguished by
the hand of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, when he made havoc of
the Trojans there and of the rest.

And Phorkys and godlike Askanios led the Phrygians from far Askania,
and these were eager to fight in the battle-throng.

And the Maionians were commanded of Mesthles and Antiphos, Talaimenes’
two sons, whose mother was the Gygaian mere. So these led the
Maionians, whose birthplace was under Tmolos.

But Nastes led the Karians, uncouth of speech, that possessed Miletos
and the mountain of Phthires, of leafage numberless, and the streams of
Maiandros and the steep crest of Mykale. These were led of Amphimachos
and Nastes: Nastes and Amphimachos the glorious children of Nomion. And
he came, forsooth, to battle with golden attire like a girl—fond man:
that held not back in any wise grievous destruction, but he was
vanguished by the hands of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, and
wise-hearted Achilles carried away his gold.

And Sarpedon and blameless Glaukos led the Lykians from far away in

Lykia by eddying Xanthos.
