


BOOK IX.

How Agamemnon sent an embassage to Achilles, beseeching him to be
appeased; and how Achilles denied him.


Thus kept the Trojans watch; but the Achaians were holden of
heaven-sent panic, handmaid of palsying fear, and all their best were
stricken to the heart with grief intolerable. Like as two winds stir up
the main, the home of fishes, even the north wind and the west wind
that blow from Thrace, coming suddenly; and the dark billow straightway
lifteth up its crest and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so
was the Achaians’ spirit troubled in their breast.

But Atreides was stricken to the heart with sore grief, and went about
bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the
assembly, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the
foremost. So they sat sorrowful in assembly, and Agamemnon stood up
weeping like unto a fountain of dark water that from a beetling cliff
poureth down its black stream; even so with deep groaning he spake amid
the Argives and said: “My friends, leaders and captains of the Argives,
Zeus son of Kronos hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of
soul; hard of heart is he, for that erewhile he promised and gave his
pledge that not till I had laid waste well-walled Ilios should I
depart, but now hath planned a cruel wile, and biddeth me return in
dishonour to Argos with the loss of many of my folk. Such meseemeth is
the good pleasure of most mighty Zeus, that hath laid low the heads of
many cities, yea and shall lay low; for his is highest power. So come,
even as I shall bid let us all obey; let us flee with our ships to our
dear native land, for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and kept silence. Long time
were the sons of the Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last
Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake amid them and said: “Atreides: with
thee first in thy folly will I contend, where it is just, O king, even
in the assembly; be not thou wroth therefor. My valour didst thou blame
in chief amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a
coward; and all this know the Argives both young and old. But the son
of crooked-counselling Kronos hath endowed thee but by halves; he
granted thee to have the honour of the sceptre above all men, but
valour he gave thee not, wherein is highest power. Sir, deemest thou
that the sons of the Achaians are thus indeed cowards and weaklings as
thou sayest? If thine own heart be set on departing, go thy way; the
way is before thee, and thy ships stand beside the sea, even the great
multitude that followed thee from Mykene. But all the other
flowing-haired Achaians will tarry here until we lay waste Troy. Nay,
let them too flee on their ships to their dear native land; yet will we
twain, even I and Sthenelos, fight till we attain the goal of Ilios;
for in God’s name are we come.”

So said he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted aloud, applauding
the saying of horse-taming Diomedes. Then knightly Nestor arose and
said amid them: “Tydeides, in battle art thou passing mighty, and in
council art thou best among thine equals in years; none of all the
Achaians will make light of thy word nor gainsay it. Now let us yield
to black night and make ready our meal; and let the sentinels bestow
them severally along the deep-delved foss without the wall. This charge
give I to the young men; and thou, Atreides, lead then the way, for
thou art the most royal. Spread thou a feast for the councillors; that
is thy place and seemly for thee. Thy huts are full of wine that the
ships of the Achaians bring thee by day from Thrace across the wide
sea; all entertainment is for thee, being king over many. In the
gathering of many shalt thou listen to him that deviseth the most
excellent counsel; sore need have all the Achaians of such as is good
and prudent, because hard by the ships our foemen are burning their
watch-fires in multitude; what man can rejoice thereat? This night
shall either destroy or save the host.”

So said he, and they gladly hearkened to him and obeyed. Forth sallied
the sentinels in their harness. Seven were the captains of the
sentinels, and with each went fivescore young men bearing their long
spears in their hands; and they took post midway betwixt foss and wall,
and kindled a fire and made ready each man his meal.

Then Atreides gathered the councillors of the Achaians, and led them to
his hut, and spread before them an abundant feast. So they put forth
their hands to the good cheer that lay before them. And when they had
put away from them the desire of meat and drink, then the old man first
began to weave his counsel, even Nestor, whose rede of old time was
approved the best. He spake to them and said: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, in thy name will I end and with thy name
begin, because thou art king over many hosts, and to thy hand Zeus hath
entrusted sceptre and law, that thou mayest take counsel for thy folk.
Thee therefore more than any it behoveth both to speak and hearken, and
to accomplish what another than thou may say. No other man shall have a
more excellent thought than this that I bear in mind from old time even
until now, since the day when thou, O heaven-sprung king, didst go and
take the damsel Briseis from angry Achilles’ hut by no consent of ours.
Nay, I right heartily dissuaded thee; but thou yieldedst to thy proud
spirit, and dishonouredst a man of valour whom even the immortals
honoured; for thou didst take and keepest from him his meed of valour.
Still let us even now take thought how we may appease him and persuade
him with gifts of friendship and kindly words.”

And Agamemnon king of men answered and said to him: “Old sir, in no
false wise hast thou accused my folly. Fool was I, I myself deny it
not. Worth many hosts is he whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now
he honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaians. But
seeing I was a fool in that I yielded to my sorry passion, I will make
amends and give a recompense beyond telling. In the midst of you all I
will name the excellent gifts; seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten
talents of gold and twenty gleaming caldrons, and twelve stalwart
horses, winners in the race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No
lackwealth were that man whose substance were as great as the prizes my
whole-hooved steeds have borne me off. And seven women will I give,
skilled in excellent handiwork, Lesbians whom I chose me from the
spoils the day that he himself took stablished Lesbos, surpassing
womankind in beauty. These will I give him, and with them shall be she
whom erst I took from him, even the daughter of Briseus. All these
things shall be set straightway before him; and if hereafter the gods
grant us to lay waste the great city of Priam, then let him enter in
when we Achaians be dividing the spoil, and lade his ship full of gold
and bronze, and himself choose twenty Trojan women, the fairest that
there be after Helen of Argos. And if we win to the richest of lands,
even Achaian Argos, he shall be my son and I will hold him in like
honour with Orestes, my stripling boy that is nurtured in all
abundance. Three daughters are mine in my well-builded hall,
Chrysothemis and Laodike and Iphianassa; let him take of them which he
will, without gifts of wooing, to Peleus’ house; and I will add a great
dower such as no man ever yet gave with his daughter. And seven
well-peopled cities will I give him, Kardamyle and Enope and grassy
Hire and holy Pherai and Antheia deep in meads, and fair Aipeia and
Pedasos land of vines. And all are nigh to the salt sea, on the
uttermost border of sandy Pylos; therein dwell men abounding in flocks
and kine, men that shall worship him like a god with gifts, and beneath
his sway fulfil his prosperous ordinances. All this will I accomplish
so he but cease from wrath. Let him yield; Hades I ween is not to be
softened neither overcome, and therefore is he hatefullest of all gods
to mortals. Yea, let him be ruled by me, inasmuch as I am more royal
and avow me to be the elder in years.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered and said: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, now are these gifts not lightly to be
esteemed that thou offerest king Achilles. Come therefore, let us speed
forth picked men to go with all haste to the hut of Peleus’ son
Achilles. Lo now, whomsoever I appoint let them consent. First let
Phoinix dear to Zeus lead the way, and after him great Aias and noble
Odysseus; and for heralds let Odios and Eurybates be their companions.
And now bring water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we
may pray unto Zeus the son of Kronos, if perchance he will have mercy
upon us.”

So said he, and spake words that were well-pleasing unto all. Forthwith
the heralds poured water on their hands, and the young men crowned the
bowls with drink and gave each man his portion after they had poured
the libation in the cups. And when they had made libation and drunk as
their heart desired, they issued forth from the hut of Agamemnon son of
Atreus. And knightly Nestor of Gerenia gave them full charge, with many
a glance to each, and chiefest to Odysseus, how they should essay to
prevail on Peleus’ noble son.

So the twain went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, making
instant prayer to the earth-embracer, the Shaker of the Earth, that
they might with ease prevail on Aiakides’ great heart. So they came to
the huts and ships of the Myrmidons, and found their king taking his
pleasure of a loud lyre, fair, of curious work, with a silver cross-bar
upon it. Therein he was delighting his soul, and singing the glories of
heroes. And over against him sate Patroklos alone in silence, watching
till Aiakides should cease from singing. So the twain came forward, and
noble Odysseus led the way, and they stood before his face; and
Achilles sprang up amazed with the lyre in his hand, and left the seat
where he was sitting, and in like manner Patroklos when he beheld the
men arose. Then Achilles fleet of foot greeted them and said: “Welcome;
verily ye are friends that are come—sore indeed is the need—even ye
that are dearest of the Achaians to me even in my wrath.”

So spake noble Achilles and led them forward, and made them sit on
settles and carpets of purple; and anon he spake to Patroklos being
near: “Bring forth a greater bowl, thou son of Menoitios; mingle
stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for dearest of men are
these that are under my roof.”

Then put they forth their hands to the good cheer lying before them.
And when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Aias
nodded to Phoinix. But noble Odysseus marked it, and filled a cup with
wine and pledged Achilles: “Hail, O Achilles! The fair feast lack we
not either in the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus neither now in thine;
for feasting is there abundance to our heart’s desire, but our thought
is not for matters of the delicious feast; nay, we behold very sore
destruction, thou fosterling of Zeus, and are afraid. Now is it in
doubt whether we save the benched ships or behold them perish, if thou
put not on thy might. Nigh unto ships and wall have the high-hearted
Trojans and famed allies pitched their camp, and kindled many fires
throughout their host, and ween that they shall no more be withheld but
will fall on our black ships. And Zeus son of Kronos sheweth them signs
upon the right by lightning, and Hector greatly exulteth in his might
and rageth furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of god nor man,
for mighty madness hath possessed him. He prayeth bright Dawn to shine
forth with all speed, for he bath passed his word to smite off from the
ships the ensigns’ tops, and to fire the hulls with devouring flame,
and hard thereby to make havoc of the Achaians confounded by the smoke.
Therefore am I sore afraid in my heart lest the gods fulfil his
boastings, and it be fated for us to perish here in Troy-land, far from
Argos pasture-land of horses. Up then! if thou art minded even at the
last to save the failing sons of the Achaians from the war-din of the
Trojans. Eschew thy grievous wrath; Agamemnon offereth thee worthy
gifts, so thou wilt cease from anger. Lo now, hearken thou to me, and I
will tell thee all the gifts that in his hut Agamemnon promised thee.
But if Agamemnon be too hateful to thy heart, both he and his gifts,
yet have thou pity on all the Achaians that faint throughout the host;
these shall honour thee as a god, for verily thou wilt earn exceeding
great glory at their hands. Yea now mightest thou slay Hector, for he
would come very near thee in his deadly madness, because he deemeth
that there is no man like unto him among the Danaans that the ships
brought hither.”

And Achilles fleet of foot answered and said unto him: “Heaven-sprung
son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, in openness must I now declare
unto you my saying, even as I am minded and as the fulfilment thereof
shall be, that ye may not sit before me and coax this way and that. For
hateful to me even as the gates of hell is he that hideth one thing in
his heart and uttereth another: but I will speak what meseemeth best.
Not me, I ween, shall Agamemnon son of Atreus persuade, nor the other
Danaans, seeing we were to have no thank for battling with the foemen
ever without respite. He that abideth at home hath equal share with him
that fighteth his best, and in like honour are held both the coward and
the brave; death cometh alike to the untoiling and to him that hath
toiled long. Neither have I any profit for that I endured tribulation
of soul, ever staking my life in fight. Even as a hen bringeth her
unfledged chickens each morsel as she winneth it, and with herself it
goeth hard, even so I was wont to watch out many a sleepless night and
pass through many bloody days of battle, warring with folk for their
womel’s sake. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste from ship-board,
and from land eleven, throughout deep-soiled Troy-land; out of all
these took I many goodly treasures and would bring and give them all to
Agamemnon son of Atreus, and he staying behind amid the fleet ships
would take them and portion out some few but keep the most. Now some he
gave to be meeds of honour to the princes and the kings, and theirs are
left untouched; only from me of all the Achaians took he my darling
lady and keepeth her. But why must the Argives make war on the Trojans?
why hath Atreides gathered his host and led them hither? is it not for
lovely-haired Helel’s sake? Do then the sons of Atreus alone of mortal
men love their wives? surely whatsoever man is good and sound of mind
loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved mine with all my
heart, though but the captive of my spear. But now that he hath taken
my meed of honour from mine arms and hath deceived me, let him not
tempt me that know him full well; he shall not prevail. Nay, Odysseus,
let him take counsel with thee and all the princes to ward from the
ships the consuming fire. Verily without mine aid he hath wrought many
things, and built a wall and dug a foss about it wide and deep, and set
a palisade therein; yet even so can he not stay murderous Hector’s
might. But so long as I was fighting amid the Achaians, Hector had no
mind to array his battle far from the wall, but scarce came unto the
Skaian gates and to the oak-tree; there once he awaited me alone and
scarce escaped my onset. But now, seeing I have no mind to fight with
noble Hector, I will to-morrow do sacrifice to Zeus and all the gods,
and store well my ships when I have launched them on the salt sea—then
shalt thou see, if thou wilt and hast any care therefor, my ships
sailing at break of day over Hellespont, the fishes’ home, and my men
right eager at the oar; and if the great Shaker of the Earth grant me
good journey, on the third day should I reach deep-soiled Phthia. There
are my great possessions that I left when I came hither to my hurt; and
yet more gold and ruddy bronze shall I bring from hence, and
fair-girdled women and grey iron, all at least that were mine by lot;
only my meed of honour hath he that gave it me taken back in his
despitefulness, even lord Agamemnon son of Atreus. To him declare ye
everything even as I charge you, openly, that all the Achaians likewise
may have indignation, if haply he hopeth to beguile yet some other
Danaan, for that he is ever clothed in shamelessness. Verily not in my
face would he dare to look, though he have the front of a dog. Neither
will I devise counsel with him nor any enterprise, for utterly he hath
deceived me and done wickedly; but never again shall he beguile me with
fair speech—let this suffice him. Let him begone in peace; Zeus the
lord of counsel hath taken away his wits. Hateful to me are his gifts,
and I hold him at a straw’s worth. Not even if he gave me ten times,
yea twenty, all that now is his, and all that may come to him
otherwhence, even all the revenue of Orchomenos or Egyptian Thebes
where the treasure-houses are stored fullest—Thebes of the hundred
gates, whence sally forth two hundred warriors through each with horses
and chariots—nay, nor gifts in number as sand or dust; not even so
shall Agamemnon persuade my soul till he have paid me back all the
bitter despite. And the daughter of Agamemnon son of Atreus will I not
wed, not were she rival of golden Aphrodite for fairness and for
handiwork matched bright-eyed Athene—not even then will I wed her; let
him choose him of the Achaians another that is his peer and is more
royal than I. For if the gods indeed preserve me and I come unto my
home, then will Peleus himself seek me a wife. Many Achaian maidens are
there throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of princes that ward
their cities; whomsoever of these I wish will I make my dear lady. Very
often was my high soul moved to take me there a wedded wife, a help
meet for me, and have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus
possesseth. For not of like worth with life hold I even all the wealth
that men say was possessed of the well-peopled city of Ilios in days of
peace gone by, before the sons of the Achaians came; neither all the
treasure that the stone threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo
encompasseth in rocky Pytho. For kine and goodly flocks are to be had
for the harrying, and tripods and chestnut horses for the purchasing;
but to bring back mal’s life neither harrying nor earning availeth when
once it hath passed the barrier of his lips. For thus my goddess mother
telleth me, Thetis the silver-footed, that twain fates are bearing me
to the issue of death. If I abide here and besiege the Trojans’ city,
then my returning home is taken from me, but my fame shall be
imperishable; but if I go home to my dear native land, my high fame is
taken from me, but my life shall endure long while, neither shall the
issue of death soon reach me. Moreover I would counsel you all to set
sail homeward, seeing ye shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; of
a surety far-seeing Zeus holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of
good courage. So go your way and tell my answer to the princes of the
Achaians, even as is the office of elders, that they may devise in
their hearts some other better counsel, such as shall save them their
ships and the host of the Achaians amid the hollow ships: since this
counsel availeth them naught that they have now devised, by reason of
my fierce wrath. But let Phoinix now abide with us and lay him to rest,
that he may follow with me on my ships to our dear native land
to-morrow, if he will; for I will not take him perforce.”

So spake he, and they all held their peace and were still, and
marvelled at his saying; for he denied them very vehemently. But at the
last spake to them the old knight Phoinix, bursting into tears, because
he was sore afraid for the ships of the Achaians: “If indeed thou
ponderest departure in thy heart, glorious Achilles, and hast no mind
at all to save the fleet ships from consuming fire, because that wrath
bath entered into thy heart; how can I be left of thee, dear son, alone
thereafter? To thee did the old knight Peleus send me the day he sent
thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia, a stripling yet unskilled in equal
war and in debate wherein men wax pre-eminent. Therefore sent he me to
teach thee all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer
of deeds. Yea, I reared thee to this greatness, thou godlike Achilles,
with my heart’s love; for with none other wouldest thou go unto the
feast, neither take meat in the hall, till that I had set thee upon my
knees and stayed thee with the savoury morsel cut first for thee, and
put the wine-cup to thy lips. Oft hast thou stained the doublet on my
breast with sputtering of wine in thy sorry helplessness. Thus I
suffered much with thee, and much I toiled, being mindful that the gods
in nowise created any issue of my body; but I made thee my son, thou
godlike Achilles, that thou mayest yet save me from grievous
destruction. Therefore, Achilles, rule thy high spirit; neither
beseemeth it thee to have a ruthless heart. Nay, even the very gods can
bend, and theirs withal is loftier majesty and honour and might. Nay,
come for the gifts; the Achaians shall honour thee even as a god. But
if without gifts thou enter into battle the bane of men, thou wilt not
be held in like honour, even though thou avert the fray.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Phoinix my
father, thou old man fosterling of Zeus, such honour need I in no wise;
for I deem that I have been honoured by the judgment of Zeus, which
shall abide upon me amid my beaked ships as long as breath tarrieth in
my body and my limbs are strong. Moreover I will say this thing to thee
and lay thou it to thine heart; trouble not my soul by weeping and
lamentation, to do the pleasure of warrior Atreides; neither beseemeth
it thee to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee. It
were good that thou with me shouldest vex him that vexeth me. Be thou
king even as I, and share my sway by halves, but these shall bear my
message. So tarry thou here and lay thee to rest in a soft bed, and
with break of day will we consider whether to depart unto our own, or
to abide.”

He spake, and nodded his brow in silence unto Patroklos to spread for
Phoinix a thick couch, that the others might bethink them to depart
from the hut with speed. Then spake to them Aias, Telamol’s godlike
son, and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles,
let us go hence; for methinks the purpose of our charge will not by
this journey be accomplished; and we must tell the news, though it be
no wise good, with all speed unto the Danaans, that now sit awaiting.
But Achilles hath wrought his proud soul to fury within him—stubborn
man, that recketh naught of his comrades’ love, wherein we worshipped
him beyond all men amid the ships—unmerciful! Yet doth a man accept
recompense of his brother’s murderer or for his dead son; and so the
man-slayer for a great price abideth in his own land, and the kinsmal’s
heart is appeased, and his proud soul, when he hath taken the
recompense. But for thee, the gods have put within thy breast a spirit
implacable and evil, by reason of one single damsel. And now we offer
thee seven damsels, far best of all, and many other gifts besides;
entertain thou then a kindly spirit, and have respect unto thine home;
because we are guests of thy roof, sent of the multitude of Danaans,
and we would fain be nearest to thee and dearest beyond all other
Achaians, as many as there be.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Aias sprung of
Zeus, thou son of Telamon, prince of the folk, thou seemest to speak
all this almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath
as oft as I bethink me of those things, how Atreides entreated me
arrogantly among the Argives, as though I were some worthless
sojourner. But go ye and declare my message; I will not take thought of
bloody war until that wise Priam’s son, noble Hector, come to the
Myrmidons’ huts and ships, slaying the Argives, and smirch the ships
with fire. But about mine hut and black ship I ween that Hector, though
he be very eager for battle, shall be refrained.”

So said he, and they took each man a two-handled cup, and made libation
and went back along the line of ships; and Odysseus led the way. And
Patroklos bade his fellows and handmaidens spread with all speed a
thick couch for Phoinix; and they obeyed and spread a couch as he
ordained, fleeces and rugs and fine flock of linen. Then the old man
laid him down and tarried for bright Dawn.

Now when those were come unto Atreides’ huts, the sons of the Achaians
stood up on this side and on that, and pledged them in cups of gold,
and questioned them; and Agamemnon king of men asked them first: “Come
now, tell me, Odysseus full of praise, thou great glory of the
Achaians; will he save the ships from consuming fire, or said he nay,
and hath wrath yet hold of his proud spirit?”

And steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: “Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, he yonder hath no mind to quench his wrath, but
is yet more filled of fury, and spurneth thee and thy gifts. He biddeth
thee take counsel for thyself amid the Argives, how to save the ships
and folk of the Achaians. And for himself he threateneth that at break
of day he will launch upon the sea his trim well-benched ships.
Moreover he said that he would counsel all to sail for home, because ye
now shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; surely far-seeing Zeus
holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of good courage. Even so
said he, and here are also these to tell the tale that were my
companions, Aias and the two heralds, both men discreet. But the old
man Phoinix laid him there to rest, even as Achilles bade him, that he
may follow with him on his ships to his dear native land to-morrow, if
he will; for he will not take him perforce.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and were still, marvelling at
his saying, for he harangued very vehemently. Long were the sons of the
Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last Diomedes of the loud
war-cry spake amid them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of
men, would thou hadst never besought Peleus’ glorious son with offer of
gifts innumerable; proud is he at any time, but now hast thou yet far
more encouraged him in his haughtiness. Howbeit we will let him bide,
whether he go or tarry; hereafter he shall fight, whenever his heart
within him biddeth and god arouseth him. Come now, even as I shall say
let us all obey. Go ye now to rest, full to your hearts’ desire of meat
and wine, wherein courage is and strength; but when fair rosy-fingered
Dawn appeareth, array thou with all speed before the ships thy folk and
horsemen, and urge them on; and fight thyself amid the foremost.”

So said he, and all the princes gave assent, applauding the saying of
Diomedes tamer of horses. And then they made libation and went every
man to his hut, and there laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep.

