


BOOK III.

How Menelaos and Paris fought in single combat; and Aphrodite rescued
Paris. And how Helen and Priam beheld the Achaian host from the walls
of Troy.


Now when they were arrayed, each company with their captains, the
Trojans marched with clamour and with shouting like unto birds, even as
when there goeth up before heaven a clamour of cranes which flee from
the coming of winter and sudden rain, and fly with clamour towards the
streams of ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pigmy men, and in
early morn offer cruel battle. But on the other side marched the
Achaians in silence breathing courage, eager at heart to give succour
man to man.

Even as when the south wind sheddeth mist over the crests of a
mountain, mist unwelcome to the shepherd, but to the robber better than
night, and a man can see no further than he casteth a stone; even so
thick arose the gathering dust-clouds at their tread as they went; and
with all speed they advanced across the plain.

So when they were now come nigh in onset on each other, godlike
Alexandros played champion to the Trojans, wearing upon his shoulders
panther-skin and curved bow and sword; and he brandished two
bronze-headed spears and challenged all the chieftains of the Argives
to fight him man to man in deadly combat. But when Menelaos dear to
Ares marked him coming in the forefront of the multitude with long
strides, then even as a lion is glad when he lighteth upon a great
carcase, a horned stag, or a wild goat that he hath found, being an
hungered; and so he devoureth it amain, even though the fleet hounds
and lusty youths set upon him; even thus was Menelaos glad when his
eyes beheld godlike Alexandros; for he thought to take vengeance upon
the sinner. So straightway he leap in his armour from his chariot to
the ground.

But when godlike Alexandros marked him appear amid the champions, his
heart was smitten, and he shrank back into the host of his comrades,
avoiding death. And even as a man that hath seen a serpent in a
mountain glade starteth backward and trembling seizeth his feet beneath
him, and he retreateth back again, and paleness hath hold of his
cheeks, even so did godlike Alexandros for fear of Atreus’ son shrink
back into the throng of lordly Trojans. But Hector beheld and upbraided
him with scornful words: “Ill Paris, most fair in semblance, thou
deceiver woman-mad, would thou hadst been unborn and died unwed. Yea,
that were my desire, and it were far better than thus to be our shame
and looked at askance of all men. I ween that the flowing-haired
Achaians laugh, deeming that a prince is our champion only because a
goodly favour is his; but in his heart is there no strength nor any
courage. Art thou indeed such an one that in thy seafaring ships thou
didst sail over the deep with the company of thy trusty comrades, and
in converse with strangers didst bring back a fair woman from a far
country, one that was by marriage daughter to warriors that bear the
spear, that she might be a sore mischief to they father and city and
all the realm, but to our foes a rejoicing, and to thyself a hanging of
the head? And canst thou not indeed abide Menelaos dear to Ares? Thou
mightest see what sort of warrior is he whose lovely wife thou hast.
Thy lyre will not avail thee nor the gifts of Aphrodite, those thy
locks and fair favour, when thou grovellest in the dust. But the
Trojans are very cowards: else ere this hadst thou donned a robe of
stone [i.e., been stoned by the people] for all the ill thou hast
wrought.”

And godlike Alexandros made answer to him again: “Hector, since in
measure thou chidest me and not beyond measure—they heart is ever keen,
even as an axe that pierceth a beam at the hand of a man that shapeth a
ship’s timber with skill, and thereby is the mal’s blow strengthened;
even such is thy heart undaunted in thy breast. Cast not in my teeth
the lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite; not to be flung aside are the
gods’ glorious gifts that of their own good will they give; for by his
desire can no man win them. But now if thou wilt have me do battle and
fight, make the other Trojans sit down and all the Achaians, and set ye
me in the midst, and Menelaos dear to Ares, to fight for Helen and all
her wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let
him take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home. And
let the rest pledge friendship and sure oaths; so may ye dwell in
deep-soiled Troy, and let them depart to Argos pasture-land of horses,
and Achaia home of fair women.”

So spake he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his saying, and went
into the midst and restrained the battalions of the Trojans, with his
spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down. But the
flowing-haired Achaians kept shooting at him, aiming with arrows and
casting stones. But Agamemnon king of men cried aloud: “Refrain, ye
Argives; shoot not, ye sons of the Achaians; for Hector of the glancing
helm hath set himself to say somewhat.”

So spake he, and they refrained from battle and made silence speedily.
And Hector spake between the two hosts, “Hear of me, Trojans and
well-greaved Achaians, the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife
hath come about. He biddeth the other Trojans and all the Achaians to
lay down their goodly armour on the bounteous earth, and himself in the
midst and Menelaos dear to Ares to fight alone for Helen and all her
wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let him
take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home; but let
all of us pledge friendship and sure oaths.”

So spake he, and they all kept silence and were still. Then in their
midst spake Menelaos of the loud war-cry: “Hearken ye now to me, too;
for into my heart most of all is grief entered; and I deem that the
parting of Argives and Trojans hath come at last; seeing ye have
endured many ills because of my quarrel and the first sin of
Alexandros. And for whichsoever of us death and fate are prepared, let
him lie dead: and be ye all parted with speed. Bring ye two lambs, one
white ram and one black ewe, for earth and sun; and let us bring one
for Zeus. And call hither great Priam, that he may pledge the oath
himself, seeing he hath sons that are overweening and faithless, lest
any by transgression do violence to the oath of Zeus; for young mel’s
hearts are ever lifted up. But wheresoever an old man entereth in, he
looketh both before and after, whereby the best issue shall come for
either side.”

So spake he, and Achaians and Trojans were glad, deeming that they
should have rest from grievous war. So they refrained their chariots to
the ranks, and themselves alighted and doffed their arms. And these
they laid upon the earth each close to each, and there was but small
space between. And Hector sent two heralds to the city will all speed,
to bring the lambs, and to call Priam. And lord Agamemnon sent forth
Talthybios to go to the hollow ships, and bade him bring a ram; and he
was not disobedient to noble Agamemnon.

Now Iris went with a message to white-armed Helen in the likeness of
her husband’s sister, the spouse of Antenor’s son, even her that lord
Helikaon Antenor’s son had to wife, Laodike fairest favoured of Priam’s
daughters. And in the hall she found Helen weaving a great purple web
of double fold, and embroidering thereon many battles of horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians, that they had endured for her sake at
the hands of Ares. So fleet-footed Iris stood by her side and said:
“Come hither, dear sister, that thou mayest see the wondrous doings of
horse-taming Trojans and mail-clad Achaians. They that erst waged
tearful war upon each other in the plain, eager for deadly battle, even
they sit now in silence, and the tall spears are planted by their
sides. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to Ares will fight with their
tall spears for thee; and thou wilt be declared the dear wife of him
that conquereth.”

So spake the goddess, and put into her heart sweet longing for her
former husband and her city and parents.

Forthwith she veiled her face in shining linen, and hastened from her
chamber, letting fall a round tear; not unattended, for there followed
with her two handmaidens, Aithre daughter of Pittheus and ox-eyed
Klymene. Then came she straightway to the place of the Skaian gates.
And they that were with Priam and Panthoos and Thymoites and Lampos and
Klytios and Hiketaon of the stock of Ares, Oukalegon withal and
Antenor, twain sages, being elders of the people, sat at the Skaian
gates. These had now ceased from battle for old age, yet were they
right good orators, like grasshoppers that in a forest sit upon a tree
and utter their lily-like [supposed to mean “delicate” or “tender”]
voice; even so sat the elders of the Trojans upon the tower. Now when
they saw Helen coming to the tower they softly spake winged words one
to the other: “Small blame is it that Trojans and well-greaved Achaians
should for such a woman long time suffer hardships; marvellously like
is she to the immortal goddesses to look upon. Yet even so, though she
be so goodly, let her go upon their ships and not stay to vex us and
our children after us.”

So said they, and Priam lifted up his voice and called to Helen: “Come
hither, dear child, and sit before me, that thou mayest see thy former
husband and they kinsfolk and thy friends. I hold thee not to blame;
nay, I hold the gods to blame who brought on me the dolorous war of the
Achaians—so mayest thou now tell me who is this huge hero, this Achaian
warrior so goodly and great. Of a truth there are others even taller by
a head; yet mine eyes never behold a man so beautiful nor so royal; for
he is like unto one that is a king.”

And Helen, fair among women, spake and answered him: “Reverend art thou
to me and dread, dear father of my lord; would that sore death had been
my pleasure when I followed thy son hither, and left my home and my
kinsfolk and my daughter in her girlhood and the lovely company of mine
age-fellows. But that was not so, wherefore I pine with weeping. Now
will I tell thee that whereof thou askest me and enquirest. This is
Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, one that is both a goodly king and
mighty spearman. And he was my husband’s brother to me, ah shameless
me; if ever such an one there was.”

So said she, and the old man marvelled at him, and said: “Ah, happy
Atreides, child of fortune, blest of heaven; now know I that many sons
of the Achaians are subject to thee. Erewhile fared I to Phrygia, the
land of vines, and there saw I that the men of Phrygia, they of the
nimble steeds, were very many, even the hosts of Otreus and godlike
Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarios. For I too
being their ally was numbered among them on the day that the Amazons
came, the peers of men. Yet were not even they so many as are the
glancing-eyed Achaians.”

And next the old man saw Odysseus, and asked: “Come now, tell me of
this man too, dear child, who is he, shorter by a head than Agamemnon
son of Atreus, but broader of shoulder and of chest to behold? His
armour lieth upon the bounteous earth, and himself like a bell-wether
rangeth the ranks of warriors. Yea, I liken him to a thick-fleeced ram
ordering a great flock of ewes.”

Then Helen sprung of Zeus made answer to him: “Now this is Laertes’
son, crafty Odysseus, that was reared in the realm of Ithaka, rugged
though it be, and skilled in all the ways of wile and cunning device.”

Then sage Antenor made answer to her: “Lady, verily the thing thou
sayest is true indeed, for erst came goodly Odysseus hither also on an
embassage for thee, in the company of Menelaos dear to Ares; and I gave
them entertainment and welcomed them in my halls, and learnt the aspect
of both and their wise devices. Now when they mingled with the Trojans
in the assembly, while all stood up Menelaos overpassed them all by the
measure of his broad shoulders; but when both sat down, Odysseus was
the more stately. And when they began to weave the web of words and
counsel in the face of all, then Menelaos harangued fluently, in few
words, but very clearly, seeing he was not long of speech, neither
random, though in years he was the younger. But whenever Odysseus full
of wiles rose up, he stood and looked down, with eyes fixed upon the
ground, and waved not his staff whether backwards or forwards, but held
it stiff, like to a man of no understanding; one would deem him to be
churlish, and naught but a fool. But when he uttered his great voice
from his chest, and words like unto the snowflakes of winter, then
could no mortal man contend with Odysseus; then marvelled we not thus
to behold Odysseus’ aspect.”

And thirdly the old man say Aias, and asked: “Who then is this other
Achaian warrior, goodly and great, preeminent among the Archives by the
measure of his head and broad shoulders?”

And long-robed Helen, fair among women, answered: “This is huge Aias,
bulwark of the Achaians. And on the other side amid the Cretans
standeth Idomeneus like a god, and about him are gathered the captains
of the Cretans. Oft did Menelaos dear to Ares entertain him in our
house whene’er he came from Crete. And now behold I all the other
glancing-eyed Achaians, whom well I could discern and tell their names;
but two captains of the host can I not see, even Kastor tamer of horses
and Polydeukes the skilful boxer, mine own brethren, whom the same
mother bare. Either they came not in the company from lovely
Lakedaimon; or they came hither indeed in their seafaring ships, but
now will not enter into the battle of the warriors, for fear of the
many scornings and revilings that are mine.”

So said she; but them the life-giving earth held fast there in

Lakedaimon, in their dear native land.

Meanwhile were the heralds bearing through the city the holy
oath-offerings, two lambs and strong-hearted wine, the fruit of the
earth, in a goat-skin bottle. And the herald Idaios bare the shining
bowl and golden cups; and came to the old man and summoned him and
said: “Rise, thou son of Laomedon. The chieftains of the horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians call on thee to go down into the plain,
that ye may pledge a trusty oath. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to
Ares will fight with their long spears for the lady’s sake; and let
lady and treasure go with him that shall conquer. And may we that are
left pledge friendship and trusty oaths and dwell in deep-soiled Troy,
and they shall depart to Argos pasture-land of horses and Achaia home
of fair women.”

So said he, and the old man shuddered and base his companions yoke the
horses; and they with speed obeyed. Then Priam mounted and drew back
the reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the splendid chariot. So the
two drave the fleet horses through the Skaian gates to the plain. And
when they had come even to the Trojans and Achaians, they went down
from the chariots upon the bounteous earth, and marched into the midst
of Trojans and Achaians. Then forthwith rose up Agamemnon king of men,
and up rose Odysseus the man of wiles; and the lordly heralds gathered
together the holy oath-offerings of the gods, and mingled the wine in a
bowl, and poured water over the princes’ hands. And Atreides put forth
his hand and drew his knife that hung ever beside his sword’s great
sheath, and cut the hair from off the lambs’ heads; and then the
heralds portioned it among the chief of the Trojans and Achaians. Then
in their midst Atreus’ son lifted up his hands and prayed aloud:
“Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou
Sun that seest all things and hearest all things, and ye Rivers and
thou Earth, and ye that in the underworld punish men outworn, whosoever
sweareth falsely; be ye witnesses, and watch over the faithful oath. If
Alexandros slay Menelaos, then let him have Helen to himself and all
her possessions; and we will depart on our seafaring ships. But if
golden-haired Menelaos slay Alexandros, then let the Trojans give back
Helen and all her possessions and pay the Argives the recompense that
is seemly, such as shall live among men that shall be hereafter. But if
so be that Priam and Priam’s sons will not pay the recompense unto me
when Alexandros falleth, then will I fight on thereafter for the price
of sin, and abide here till I compass the end of war.”

So said he, and cut the lambs’ throats with the pitiless knife. Them he
laid gasping upon the ground, failing of breath, for the knife had
taken their strength from them; and next they drew the wine from the
bowl into the cups, and poured it forth and prayed to the gods that
live for ever. And thus would say many an one of Achaians and Trojans:
“Zeus most glorious, most great, and all ye immortal gods, which folk
soe’er be first to sin against the oaths, may their brains be so poured
forth upon the earth even as this wine, theirs and their childrel’s;
and let their wives be made subject unto strangers.”

So spake they, but the son of Kronos vouchsafed not yet fulfilment. And
in their midst Priam of the seed of Dardanos uttered his saying:
“Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. I verily will return
back to windy Ilios, seeing that I can in no wise bear to behold with
mine eyes my dear son fighting with Menelaos dear to Ares. But Zeus
knoweth, and all the immortal gods, for whether of the twain the doom
of death is appointed.”

So spake the godlike man, and laid the lambs in his chariot, and
entered in himself, and drew back the reins; and by his side Antenor
mounted the splendid chariot. So they departed back again to Ilios; and
Hector son of Priam and goodly Odysseus first meted out a space, and
then they took the lots, and shook them in a bronze-bound helmet, to
know whether of the twain should first cast his spear of bronze. And
the people prayed and lifted up their hands to the gods; and thus would
say many an one of Achaians and Trojans: “Father Zeus, that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great; whichsoe’er it be that brought this
trouble upon both peoples, vouchsafe that he may die and enter the
house of Hades; that so for us peace may be assured and trusty oaths.”

So said they; and great Hector of the glancing plume shook the helmet,
looking behind him; and quickly leapt forth the lot of Paris. Then the
people sat them down by ranks where each mal’s high-stepping horses and
inwrought armour lay. And upon his shoulders goodly Alexandros donned
his beauteous armour, even he that was lord to Helen of the lovely
hair. First upon his legs set he his greaves, beautiful, fastened with
silver ankle-clasps; next upon his breast he donned the corslet of his
brother Lykaon, and fitted it upon himself. And over his shoulders cast
he his silver-studded sword of bronze, and then a shield great and
sturdy. And on his mighty head he set a wrought helmet of horse-hair
crest, whereover the plume nodded terribly, and he took him a strong
spear fitted to his grasp. And in like wise warlike Menelaos donned his
armour.

So when they had armed themselves on either side in the throng, they
strode between Trojans and Achaians, fierce of aspect, and wonder came
on them that beheld, both on the Trojans tamers of horses and on the
well-greaved Achaians. Then took they their stand near together in the
measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath each against other.
First Alexandros hurled his far shadowing spear, and smote on Atreides’
round shield; but the bronze brake not through, for its point was
turned in the stout shield. Next Menelaos son of Atreus lifted up his
hand to cast, and made prayer to father Zeus: “King Zeus, grant me
revenge on him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly
Alexandros, and subdue thou him at my hands; so that many an one of men
that shall be hereafter may shudder to wrong his host that hath shown
him kindness.”

So said he, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled, and smote
on the round shield of the son of Priam. Through the bright shield went
the ponderous spear and through the inwrought breastplate it pressed
on; and straight beside his flank the spear rent the tunic, but he
swerved and escaped black death. Then Atreides drew his silver-studded
sword, and lifted up his hand and smote the helmet-ridge; but the sword
shattered upon it into three, yea four, and fell from his hand. Thereat
Atreides looked up to the wide heaven and cried: “Father Zeus, surely
none of the gods is crueller than thou. Verily I thought to have gotten
vengeance on Alexandros for his wickedness, but now my sword breaketh
in my hand, and my spear sped from my grasp in vain, and I have not
smitten him.”

So saying, he leapt upon him and caught him by his horse-hair crest,
and swinging him round dragged him towards the well-greaved Achaians;
and he was strangled by the embroidered strap beneath his soft throat,
drawn tight below his chin to hold his helm. Now would Menelaos have
dragged him away and won glory unspeakable, but that Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite was swift to mark, and tore asunder for him the strap of
slaughtered ox’s hide; so the helmet came away empty in his stalwart
hand. Thereat Menelaos cast it with a swing toward the well-greaved
Achaians, and his trusty comrades took it up; and himself sprang back
again eager to slay him with spear of bronze. But Aphrodite snatched up
Paris, very easily as a goddess may, and hid him in thick darkness, and
sent him down in his fragrant perfumed chamber; and herself went to
summon Helen. Her she found on the high tower, and about her the Trojan
women thronged. So with her hand she plucked her perfumed raiment and
shook it and spake to her in the likeness of an aged dame, a
wool-comber that was wont to work for her fair wool when she dwelt in
Lakedaimon, whom too she greatly loved. Even in her likeness fair
Aphrodite spake: “Come hither; Alexandros summoneth thee to go
homeward. There is he in his chamber and inlaid bed, radiant in beauty
and vesture; nor wouldst thou deem him to be come from fighting his
foe, but rather to be faring to the dance, or from the dance to be just
resting and set down.”

So said she, and stirred Helel’s soul within her breast; and when now
she marked the fair neck and lovely breast and sparkling eyes of the
goddess, she marvelled straightway and spake a word and called upon her
name: “Strange queen, why art thou desirous now to beguile me? Verily
thou wilt lead me further on to some one of the people cities of
Phrygia or lovely Maionia, if there too thou hast perchance some other
darling among mortal men, because even now Menelaos hath conquered
goodly Alexandros, and will lead me, accursed me, to his home.
Therefore thou comest hither with guileful intent. Go and sit thou by
his side and depart from the way of the gods; neither let thy feet ever
bear thee back to Olympus, but still be vexed for his sake and guard
him till he make thee his wife or perchance his slave. But thither will
I not go— that were a sinful thing—to array the bed of him; all the
women of Troy will blame me thereafter; and I have griefs untold within
my soul.”

Then in wrath bright Aphrodite spake to her: “Provoke me not, rash
woman, lest in mine anger I desert thee, and hate thee even as now I
love thee beyond measure, and lest I devise grievous enmities between
both, even betwixt Trojans and Achaians, and so thou perish in evil
wise.”

So said she, and Helen sprung of Zeus was afraid, and went wrapped in
her bright radiant vesture, silently, and the Trojan women marked her
not; and the goddess led the way.

Now when they were come to the beautiful house of Alexandros the
handmaidens turned straightway to their tasks, and the fair lady went
to the high-roofed chamber; and laughter-loving Aphrodite took for her
a chair and brought it, even she the goddess, and set it before the
face of Paris. There Helen took her seat, the child of aegis-bearing
Zeus, and with eyes turned askance spake and chode her lord: “Thou
comest back from battle; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished of
that great warrior that was my former husband. Verily it was once thy
boast that thou wast a better man than Menelaos dear to Ares, in the
might of thine arm and thy spear. But go now, challenge Menelaos, dear
to Ares to fight thee again face to face. Nay, but I, even I, bid thee
refrain, nor fight a fight with golden-haired Menelaos man to man,
neither attack him recklessly, lest perchance thou fall to his spear
anon.”

And Paris made answer to her and said: “Chide not my soul, lady, with
cruel taunts. For now indeed hath Menelaos vanquished me with Athene’s
aid, but another day may I do so unto him; for we too have gods with
us. But come now, let us have joy of love upon our couch; for never yet
hath love so enwrapped my heart—not even then when first I snatched
thee from lovely Lakedaimon and sailed with thee on my sea-faring
ships, and in the isle of Kranae had converse with thee upon thy couch
in love—as I love thee now and sweet desire taketh hold upon me.” So
saying he led the way to the couch, and the lady followed with him.

Thus laid they them upon their fretted couch; but Atreides the while
strode through the host like to a wild beast, if anywhere he might set
eyes on godlike Alexandros. But none of the Trojans or their famed
allies could discover Alexandros to Menelaos dear to Ares. Yet surely
did they in no wise hide him for kindliness, could any have seen him;
for he was hated of all even as black death. So Agamemnon king of men
spake among them there: “Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and
allies. Now is victory declared for Menelaos dear to Ares; give ye back
Helen of Argos and the possessions with her, and pay ye the recompense
such as is seemly, that it may live even among men that shall be
hereafter.” So said Atreides, and all the Achaians gave assent.

